This material is Open Game Content, and is licensed for public use under
the terms of the Open Game License v1.0a.

SPELLS (A-B)

Acid Arrow

Conjuration (Creation) \[Acid\]

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 2

**Components:** V, S, M, F

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level)

**Effect:** One arrow of acid

**Duration:** 1 round + 1 round per three levels

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

A magical arrow of acid springs from your hand and speeds to its target.
You must succeed on a ranged touch attack to hit your target. The arrow
deals 2d4 points of acid damage with no splash damage. For every three
caster levels (to a maximum of 18th), the acid, unless somehow
neutralized, lasts for another round, dealing another 2d4 points of
damage in that round.

*Material Component:* Powdered rhubarb leaf and an adder’s stomach.

*Focus:* A dart.

Acid Fog

Conjuration (Creation) \[Acid\]

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 6, Water 7

**Components:** V, S, M/DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Effect:** Fog spreads in 20-ft. radius, 20 ft. high

**Duration:** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

*Acid fog* creates a billowing mass of misty vapors similar to that
produced by a *solid fog* spell. In addition to slowing creatures down
and obscuring sight, this spell’s vapors are highly acidic. Each round
on your turn, starting when you cast the spell, the fog deals 2d6 points
of acid damage to each creature and object within it.

*Arcane Material Component:* A pinch of dried, powdered peas combined
with powdered animal hoof.

Acid Splash

Conjuration (Creation) \[Acid\]

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 0

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Effect:** One missile of acid

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

You fire a small orb of acid at the target. You must succeed on a ranged
touch attack to hit your target. The orb deals 1d3 points of acid
damage.

Aid

Enchantment (Compulsion) \[Mind-Affecting\]

**Level:** Clr 2, Good 2, Luck 2

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Living creature touched

**Duration:** 1 min./level

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (harmless)

*Aid* grants the target a +1 morale bonus on attack rolls and saves
against fear effects, plus temporary hit points equal to 1d8 + caster
level (to a maximum of 1d8+10 temporary hit points at caster level
10th).

Air Walk

Transmutation \[Air\]

**Level:** Air 4, Clr 4, Drd 4

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Creature (Gargantuan or smaller) touched

**Duration:** 10 min./level

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (harmless)

The subject can tread on air as if walking on solid ground. Moving
upward is similar to walking up a hill. The maximum upward or downward
angle possible is 45 degrees, at a rate equal to one-half the air
walker’s normal speed.

A strong wind (21+ mph) can push the subject along or hold it back. At
the end of its turn each round, the wind blows the air walker 5 feet for
each 5 miles per hour of wind speed. The creature may be subject to
additional penalties in exceptionally strong or turbulent winds, such as
loss of control over movement or physical damage from being buffeted
about.

Should the spell duration expire while the subject is still aloft, the
magic fails slowly. The subject floats downward 60 feet per round for
1d6 rounds. If it reaches the ground in that amount of time, it lands
safely. If not, it falls the rest of the distance, taking 1d6 points of
damage per 10 feet of fall. Since dispelling a spell effectively ends
it, the subject also descends in this way if the *air walk* spell is
dispelled, but not if it is negated by an *antimagic field*.

You can cast *air walk* on a specially trained mount so it can be ridden
through the air. You can train a mount to move with the aid of *air
walk* (counts as a trick; see Handle Animal skill) with one week of work
and a DC 25 Handle Animal check.

Alarm

Abjuration

**Level:** Brd 1, Rgr 1, Sor/Wiz 1

**Components:** V, S, F/DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Area:** 20-ft.-radius emanation centered on a point in space

**Duration:** 2 hours/level (D)

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

A*larm* sounds a mental or audible alarm each time a creature of Tiny or
larger size enters the warded area or touches it. A creature that speaks
the password (determined by you at the time of casting) does not set off
the *alarm*. You decide at the time of casting whether the *alarm* will
be mental or audible.

*Mental Alarm:* A mental *alarm* alerts you (and only you) so long as
you remain within 1 mile of the warded area. You note a single mental
“ping” that awakens you from normal sleep but does not otherwise disturb
concentration. A *silence* spell has no effect on a mental *alarm*.

*Audible Alarm:* An audible *alarm* produces the sound of a hand bell,
and anyone within 60 feet of the warded area can hear it clearly. Reduce
the distance by 10 feet for each interposing closed door and by 20 feet
for each substantial interposing wall.

In quiet conditions, the ringing can be heard faintly as far as 180 feet
away. The sound lasts for 1 round. Creatures within a *silence* spell
cannot hear the ringing.

Ethereal or astral creatures do not trigger the *alarm*.

*Alarm* can be made permanent with a *permanency* spell.

*Arcane Focus:* A tiny bell and a piece of very fine silver wire

Align Weapon

Transmutation \[see text\]

**Level:** Clr 2

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Weapon touched or fifty projectiles (all of which must be in
contact with each other at the time of casting)

**Duration:** 1 min./level

**Saving Throw:** Will negates (harmless, object)

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (harmless, object)

*Align weapon* makes a weapon good, evil, lawful, or chaotic, as you
choose. A weapon that is aligned can bypass the damage reduction of
certain creatures. This spell has no effect on a weapon that already has
an alignment.

You can’t cast this spell on a natural weapon, such as an unarmed
strike.

When you make a weapon good, evil, lawful, or chaotic, *align weapon* is
a good, evil, lawful, or chaotic spell, respectively.

Alter Self

Transmutation

**Level:** Brd 2, Sor/Wiz 2

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Personal

**Target:** You

**Duration:** 10 min./level (D)

You assume the form of a creature of the same type as your normal form.
The new form must be within one size category of your normal size. The
maximum HD of an assumed form is equal to your caster level, to a
maximum of 5 HD at 5th level. You can change into a member of your own
kind or even into yourself.

You retain your own ability scores. Your class and level, hit points,
alignment, base attack bonus, and base save bonuses all remain the same.
You retain all supernatural and spell-like special attacks and qualities
of your normal form, except for those requiring a body part that the new
form does not have (such as a mouth for a breath weapon or eyes for a
gaze attack).

You keep all extraordinary special attacks and qualities derived from
class levels, but you lose any from your normal form that are not
derived from class levels.

If the new form is capable of speech, you can communicate normally. You
retain any spellcasting ability you had in your original form, but the
new form must be able to speak intelligibly (that is, speak a language)
to use verbal components and must have limbs capable of fine
manipulation to use somatic or material components.

You acquire the physical qualities of the new form while retaining your
own mind. Physical qualities include natural size, mundane movement
capabilities (such as burrowing, climbing, walking, swimming, and flight
with wings, to a maximum speed of 120 feet for flying or 60 feet for
nonflying movement), natural armor bonus, natural weapons (such as
claws, bite, and so on), racial skill bonuses, racial bonus feats, and
any gross physical qualities (presence or absence of wings, number of
extremities, and so forth). A body with extra limbs does not allow you
to make more attacks (or more advantageous two-weapon attacks) than
normal.

You do not gain any extraordinary special attacks or special qualities
not noted above under physical qualities, such as darkvision, low-light
vision, blindsense, blindsight, fast healing, regeneration, scent, and
so forth.

You do not gain any supernatural special attacks, special qualities, or
spell-like abilities of the new form. Your creature type and subtype (if
any) remain the same regardless of your new form. You cannot take the
form of any creature with a template, even if that template doesn’t
change the creature type or subtype.

You can freely designate the new form’s minor physical qualities (such
as hair color, hair texture, and skin color) within the normal ranges
for a creature of that kind. The new form’s significant physical
qualities (such as height, weight, and gender) are also under your
control, but they must fall within the norms for the new form’s kind.
You are effectively disguised as an average member of the new form’s
race. If you use this spell to create a disguise, you get a +10 bonus on
your Disguise check.

When the change occurs, your equipment, if any, either remains worn or
held by the new form (if it is capable of wearing or holding the item),
or melds into the new form and becomes nonfunctional. When you revert to
your true form, any objects previously melded into the new form reappear
in the same location on your body they previously occupied and are once
again functional. Any new items you wore in the assumed form and can’t
wear in your normal form fall off and land at your feet; any that you
could wear in either form or carry in a body part common to both forms
at the time of reversion are still held in the same way. Any part of the
body or piece of equipment that is separated from the whole reverts to
its true form.

Analyze Dweomer

Divination

**Level:** Brd 6, Sor/Wiz 6

**Components:** V, S, F

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Targets:** One object or creature per caster level

**Duration:** 1 round/level (D)

**Saving Throw:** None or Will negates; see text

**Spell Resistance:** No

You discern all spells and magical properties present in a number of
creatures or objects. Each round, you may examine a single creature or
object that you can see as a free action. In the case of a magic item,
you learn its functions, how to activate its functions (if appropriate),
and how many charges are left (if it uses charges). In the case of an
object or creature with active spells cast upon it, you learn each
spell, its effect, and its caster level.

An attended object may attempt a Will save to resist this effect if its
holder so desires. If the save succeeds, you learn nothing about the
object except what you can discern by looking at it. An object that
makes its save cannot be affected by any other *analyze dweomer* spells
for 24 hours.

*Analyze dweomer* does not function when used on an artifact.

*Focus:* A tiny lens of ruby or sapphire set in a small golden loop. The
gemstone must be worth at least 1,500 gp.

Animal Growth

Transmutation

**Level:** Drd 5, Rgr 4, Sor/Wiz 5

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Targets:** Up to one animal (Gargantuan or smaller) per two levels, no
two of which can be more than 30 ft. apart

**Duration:** 1 min./level

**Saving Throw:** Fortitude negates

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

A number of animals grow to twice their normal size and eight times
their normal weight. This alteration changes each animal’s size category
to the next largest, grants it a +8 size bonus to Strength and a +4 size
bonus to Constitution (and thus an extra 2 hit points per HD), and
imposes a –2 size penalty to Dexterity. The creature’s existing natural
armor bonus increases by 2. The size change also affects the animal’s
modifier to AC and attack rolls and its base damage. The animal’s space
and reach change as appropriate to the new size, but its speed does not
change.

The spell also grants each subject damage reduction 10/magic and a +4
resistance bonus on saving throws. If insufficient room is available for
the desired growth, the creature attains the maximum possible size and
may make a Strength check (using its increased Strength) to burst any
enclosures in the process. If it fails, it is constrained without harm
by the materials enclosing it— the spell cannot be used to crush a
creature by increasing its size.

All equipment worn or carried by an animal is similarly enlarged by the
spell, though this change has no effect on the magical properties of any
such equipment.

Any enlarged item that leaves the enlarged creature’s possession
instantly returns to its normal size.

The spell gives no means of command or influence over the enlarged
animals.

Multiple magical effects that increase size do not stack.

Animal Messenger

Enchantment (Compulsion) \[Mind-Affecting\]

**Level:** Brd 2, Drd 2, Rgr 1

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target:** One Tiny animal

**Duration:** One day/level

**Saving Throw:** None; see text

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

You compel a Tiny animal to go to a spot you designate. The most common
use for this spell is to get an animal to carry a message to your
allies. The animal cannot be one tamed or trained by someone else,
including such creatures as familiars and animal companions.

Using some type of food desirable to the animal as a lure, you call the
animal to you. It advances and awaits your bidding. You can mentally
impress on the animal a certain place well known to you or an obvious
landmark. The directions must be simple, because the animal depends on
your knowledge and can’t find a destination on its own. You can attach
some small item or note to the messenger. The animal then goes to the
designated location and waits there until the duration of the spell
expires, whereupon it resumes its normal activities.

During this period of waiting, the messenger allows others to approach
it and remove any scroll or token it carries. The intended recipient
gains no special ability to communicate with the animal or read any
attached message (if it’s written in a language he or she doesn’t know,
for example).

*Material Component:* A morsel of food the animal likes.

Animal Shapes

Transmutation

**Level:** Animal 7, Drd 8

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Targets:** Up to one willing creature per level, all within 30 ft. of
each other

**Duration:** 1 hour/level (D)

**Saving Throw:** None; see text

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (harmless)

As *polymorph,* except you polymorph up to one willing creature per
caster level into an animal of your choice; the spell has no effect on
unwilling creatures. All creatures must take the same kind of animal
form. Recipients remain in the animal form until the spell expires or
until you dismiss it for all recipients. In addition, an individual
subject may choose to resume its normal form as a full-round action;
doing so ends the spell for that subject alone. The maximum HD of an
assumed form is equal to the subject’s HD or your caster level,
whichever is lower, to a maximum of 20 HD at 20th level.

Animal Trance

Enchantment (Compulsion) \[Mind-Affecting, Sonic\]

**Level:** Brd 2, Drd 2

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Targets:** Animals or magical beasts with Intelligence 1 or 2

**Duration:** Concentration

**Saving Throw:** Will negates; see text

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

Your swaying motions and music (or singing, or chanting) compel animals
and magical beasts to do nothing but watch you. Only a creature with an
Intelligence score of 1 or 2 can be fascinated by this spell. Roll 2d6
to determine the total number of HD worth of creatures that you
fascinate. The closest targets are selected first until no more targets
within range can be affected.

A magical beast, a dire animal, or an animal trained to attack or guard
is allowed a saving throw; an animal not trained to attack or guard is
not.

Animate Dead

Necromancy \[Evil\]

**Level:** Clr 3, Death 3, Sor/Wiz 4

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Targets:** One or more corpses touched

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

This spell turns the bones or bodies of dead creatures into undead
skeletons or zombies that follow your spoken commands.

The undead can follow you, or they can remain in an area and attack any
creature (or just a specific kind of creature) entering the place. They
remain animated until they are destroyed. (A destroyed skeleton or
zombie can’t be animated again.)

Regardless of the type of undead you create with this spell, you can’t
create more HD of undead than twice your caster level with a single
casting of *animate dead*. (The *desecrate* spell doubles this limit)

The undead you create remain under your control indefinitely. No matter
how many times you use this spell, however, you can control only 4 HD
worth of undead creatures per caster level. If you exceed this number,
all the newly created creatures fall under your control, and any excess
undead from previous castings become uncontrolled. (You choose which
creatures are released.) If you are a cleric, any undead you might
command by virtue of your power to command or rebuke undead do not count
toward the limit.

*Skeletons:* A skeleton can be created only from a mostly intact corpse
or skeleton. The corpse must have bones. If a skeleton is made from a
corpse, the flesh falls off the bones.

*Zombies:* A zombie can be created only from a mostly intact corpse. The
corpse must be that of a creature with a true anatomy.

*Material Component:* You must place a black onyx gem worth at least 25
gp per Hit Die of the undead into the mouth or eye socket of each corpse
you intend to animate. The magic of the spell turns these gems into
worthless, burned-out shells.

Animate Objects

Transmutation

**Level:** Brd 6, Chaos 6, Clr 6

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Targets:** One Small object per caster level; see text

**Duration:** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

You imbue inanimate objects with mobility and a semblance of life. Each
such animated object then immediately attacks whomever or whatever you
initially designate.

An animated object can be of any nonmagical material. You may animate
one Small or smaller object or an equivalent number of larger objects
per caster level. A Medium object counts as two Small or smaller
objects, a Large object as four, a Huge object as eight, a Gargantuan
object as sixteen, and a Colossal object as thirty-two. You can change
the designated target or targets as a move action, as if directing an
active spell.

This spell cannot animate objects carried or worn by a creature.

*Animate objects* can be made permanent with a *permanency* spell.

Animate Plants

Transmutation

**Level:** Drd 7, Plant 7

**Components:** V

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Targets:** One Large plant per three caster levels or all plants
within range; see text

**Duration:** 1 round/level or 1 hour/level; see text

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

You imbue inanimate plants with mobility and a semblance of life. Each
animated plant then immediately attacks whomever or whatever you
initially designate as though it were an animated object of the
appropriate size category. You may animate one Large or smaller plant,
or an equivalent number of larger plants, per three caster levels. A
Huge plant counts as two Large or smaller plants, a Gargantuan plant as
four, and a Colossal plant as eight. You can change the designated
target or targets as a move action, as if directing an active spell.

Use the statistics for animated objects*,* except that plants smaller
than Large usually don’t have hardness.

*Animate plants* cannot affect plant creatures, nor does it affect
nonliving vegetable material.

*Entangle:* Alternatively, you may imbue all plants within range with a
degree of mobility, which allows them to entwine around creatures in the
area. This usage of the spell duplicates the effect of an *entangle*
spell. Spell resistance does not keep creatures from being entangled.
This effect lasts 1 hour per caster level.

Animate Rope

Transmutation

**Level:** Brd 1, Sor/Wiz 1

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Target:** One ropelike object, length up to 50 ft. + 5 ft./level; see
text

**Duration:** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

You can animate a nonliving ropelike object. The maximum length assumes
a rope with a 1-inch diameter.

Reduce the maximum length by 50% for every additional inch of thickness,
and increase it by 50% for each reduction of the rope’s diameter by
half.

The possible commands are “coil” (form a neat, coiled stack), “coil and
knot,” “loop,” “loop and knot,” “tie and knot,” and the opposites of all
of the above (“uncoil,” and so forth). You can give one command each
round as a move action, as if directing an active spell.

The rope can enwrap only a creature or an object within 1 foot of it—it
does not snake outward—so it must be thrown near the intended target.
Doing so requires a successful ranged touch attack roll (range increment
10 feet). A typical 1- inch-diameter hempen rope has 2 hit points, AC
10, and requires a DC 23 Strength check to burst it. The rope does not
deal damage, but it can be used as a trip line or to cause a single
opponent that fails a Reflex saving throw to become entangled. A
creature capable of spellcasting that is bound by this spell must make a
DC 15 Concentration check to cast a spell. An entangled creature can
slip free with a DC 20 Escape Artist check.

The rope itself and any knots tied in it are not magical.

This spell grants a +2 bonus on any Use Rope checks you make when using
the transmuted rope.

The spell cannot animate objects carried or worn by a creature.

Antilife Shell

Abjuration

**Level:** Animal 6, Clr 6, Drd 6

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 1 round

**Range:** 10 ft.

**Area:** 10-ft.-radius emanation, centered on you

**Duration:** 10 min./level (D)

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

You bring into being a mobile, hemispherical energy field that prevents
the entrance of most types of living creatures.

The effect hedges out animals, aberrations, dragons, fey, giants,
humanoids, magical beasts, monstrous humanoids, oozes, plants, and
vermin, but not constructs, elementals, outsiders, or undead.

This spell may be used only defensively, not aggressively. Forcing an
abjuration barrier against creatures that the spell keeps at bay
collapses the barrier.

Antimagic Field

Abjuration

**Level:** Clr 8, Magic 6, Protection 6, Sor/Wiz 6

**Components:** V, S, M/DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** 10 ft.

**Area:** 10-ft.-radius emanation, centered on you

**Duration:** 10 min./level (D)

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** See text

An invisible barrier surrounds you and moves with you. The space within
this barrier is impervious to most magical effects, including spells,
spell-like abilities, and supernatural abilities. Likewise, it prevents
the functioning of any magic items or spells within its confines.

An *antimagic field* suppresses any spell or magical effect used within,
brought into, or cast into the area, but does not dispel it. Time spent
within an *antimagic field* counts against the suppressed spell’s
duration.

Summoned creatures of any type and incorporeal undead wink out if they
enter an *antimagic field.* They reappear in the same spot once the
field goes away. Time spent winked out counts normally against the
duration of the conjuration that is maintaining the creature. If you
cast *antimagic field* in an area occupied by a summoned creature that
has spell resistance, you must make a caster level check (1d20 + caster
level) against the creature’s spell resistance to make it wink out. (The
effects of instantaneous conjurations are not affected by an *antimagic
field* because the conjuration itself is no longer in effect, only its
result.)

A normal creature can enter the area, as can normal missiles.
Furthermore, while a magic sword does not function magically within the
area, it is still a sword (and a masterwork sword at that). The spell
has no effect on golems and other constructs that are imbued with magic
during their creation process and are thereafter self-supporting (unless
they have been summoned, in which case they are treated like any other
summoned creatures). Elementals, corporeal undead, and outsiders are
likewise unaffected unless summoned. These creatures’ spell-like or
supernatural abilities, however, may be temporarily nullified by the
field. *Dispel magic* does not remove the field.

Two or more *antimagic fields* sharing any of the same space have no
effect on each other. Certain spells, such as *wall of force, prismatic
sphere*, and *prismatic wall,* remain unaffected by *antimagic field*
(see the individual spell descriptions). Artifacts and deities are
unaffected by mortal magic such as this.

Should a creature be larger than the area enclosed by the barrier, any
part of it that lies outside the barrier is unaffected by the field.

*Arcane Material Component:* A pinch of powdered iron or iron filings.

Antipathy

Enchantment (Compulsion) \[Mind-Affecting\]

**Level:** Drd 9, Sor/Wiz 8

**Components:** V, S, M/DF

**Casting Time:** 1 hour

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target:** One location (up to a 10-ft. cube/level) or one object

**Duration:** 2 hours/level (D)

**Saving Throw:** Will partial

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

You cause an object or location to emanate magical vibrations that repel
either a specific kind of intelligent creature or creatures of a
particular alignment, as defined by you. The kind of creature to be
affected must be named specifically. A creature subtype is not specific
enough. Likewise, the specific alignment to be repelled must be named.

Creatures of the designated kind or alignment feel an overpowering urge
to leave the area or to avoid the affected item.

A compulsion forces them to abandon the area or item, shunning it and
never willingly returning to it while the spell is in effect. A creature
that makes a successful saving throw can stay in the area or touch the
item but feels uncomfortable doing so. This distracting discomfort
reduces the creature’s Dexterity score by 4 points.

*Antipathy* counters and dispels *sympathy*.

*Arcane Material Component:* A lump of alum soaked in vinegar.

Antiplant Shell

Abjuration

**Level:** Drd 4

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** 10 ft.

**Area:** 10-ft.-radius emanation, centered on you

**Duration:** 10 min./level (D)

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

The *antiplant shell* spell creates an invisible, mobile barrier that
keeps all creatures within the shell protected from attacks by plant
creatures or animated plants. As with many abjuration spells, forcing
the barrier against creatures that the spell keeps at bay strains and
collapses the field.

Arcane Eye

Divination (Scrying)

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 4

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 10 minutes

**Range:** Unlimited

**Effect:** Magical sensor

**Duration:** 1 min./level (D)

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

You create an invisible magical sensor that sends you visual
information. You can create the *arcane eye* at any point you can see,
but it can then travel outside your line of sight without hindrance. An
*arcane eye* travels at 30 feet per round (300 feet per minute) if
viewing an area ahead as a human would (primarily looking at the floor)
or 10 feet per round (100 feet per minute) if examining the ceiling and
walls as well as the floor ahead. It sees exactly as you would see if
you were there.

The eye can travel in any direction as long as the spell lasts. Solid
barriers block its passage, but it can pass through a hole or space as
small as 1 inch in diameter. The eye can’t enter another plane of
existence, even through a *gate* or similar magical portal.

You must concentrate to use an *arcane eye.* If you do not concentrate,
the eye is inert until you again concentrate.

*Material Component:* A bit of bat fur.

Arcane Lock

Abjuration

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 2

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** The door, chest, or portal touched, up to 30 sq. ft./level
in size

**Duration:** Permanent

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

An *arcane lock* spell cast upon a door, chest, or portal magically
locks it. You can freely pass your own *arcane lock* without affecting
it; otherwise, a door or object secured with this spell can be opened
only by breaking in or with a successful *dispel magic* or *knock*
spell. Add 10 to the normal DC to break open a door or portal affected
by this spell. (A *knock* spell does not remove an *arcane lock;* it
only suppresses the effect for 10 minutes.)

*Material Component:* Gold dust worth 25 gp.

Arcane Mark

Universal

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 0

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** 0 ft.

**Effect:** One personal rune or mark, all of which must fit within 1
sq. ft.

**Duration:** Permanent

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

This spell allows you to inscribe your personal rune or mark, which can
consist of no more than six characters. The writing can be visible or
invisible. An *arcane mark* spell enables you to etch the rune upon any
substance without harm to the material upon which it is placed. If an
invisible mark is made, a *detect magic* spell causes it to glow and be
visible, though not necessarily understandable.

*See invisibility, true seeing*, a *gem of seeing*, or a *robe of eyes*
likewise allows the user to see an invisible *arcane mark.* A *read
magic* spell reveals the words, if any. The mark cannot be dispelled,
but it can be removed by the caster or by an *erase* spell.

If an *arcane mark* is placed on a living being, normal wear gradually
causes the effect to fade in about a month.

*Arcane mark* must be cast on an object prior to casting *instant
summons* on the same object (see that spell description for details).

Arcane Sight

Divination

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 3

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Personal

**Target:** You

**Duration:** 1 min./level (D)

This spell makes your eyes glow blue and allows you to see magical auras
within 120 feet of you. The effect is similar to that of a *detect
magic* spell, but *arcane sight* does not require concentration and
discerns aura location and power more quickly.

You know the location and power of all magical auras within your sight.
An aura’s power depends on a spell’s functioning level or an item’s
caster level, as noted in the description of the *detect magic* spell.
If the items or creatures bearing the auras are in line of sight, you
can make Spellcraft skill checks to determine the school of magic
involved in each. (Make one check per aura; DC 15 + spell level, or 15 +
one-half caster level for a nonspell effect.)

If you concentrate on a specific creature within 120 feet of you as a
standard action, you can determine whether it has any spellcasting or
spell-like abilities, whether these are arcane or divine (spell-like
abilities register as arcane), and the strength of the most powerful
spell or spell-like ability the creature currently has available for
use.

*Arcane sight* can be made permanent with a *permanency* spell.

Arcane Sight, Greater

Divination

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 7

This spell functions like *arcane sight,* except that you automatically
know which spells or magical effects are active upon any individual or
object you see.

*Greater arcane sight* doesn’t let you identify magic items.

Unlike *arcane sight*, this spell cannot be made permanent with a
*permanency* spell.

Astral Projection

Necromancy

**Level:** Clr 9, Sor/Wiz 9, Travel 9

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 30 minutes

**Range:** Touch

**Targets:** You plus one additional willing creature touched per two
caster levels

**Duration:** See text

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

By freeing your spirit from your physical body, this spell allows you to
project an astral body onto another plane altogether.

You can bring the astral forms of other willing creatures with you,
provided that these subjects are linked in a circle with you at the time
of the casting. These fellow travelers are dependent upon you and must
accompany you at all times. If something happens to you during the
journey, your companions are stranded wherever you left them.

You project your astral self onto the Astral Plane, leaving your
physical body behind on the Material Plane in a state of suspended
animation. The spell projects an astral copy of you and all you wear or
carry onto the Astral Plane. Since the Astral Plane touches upon other
planes, you can travel astrally to any of these other planes as you
will. To enter one, you leave the Astral Plane, forming a new physical
body (and equipment) on the plane of existence you have chosen to enter.

While you are on the Astral Plane, your astral body is connected at all
times to your physical body by a silvery cord. If the cord is broken,
you are killed, astrally and physically. Luckily, very few things can
destroy a silver cord. When a second body is formed on a different
plane, the incorporeal silvery cord remains invisibly attached to the
new body. If the second body or the astral form is slain, the cord
simply returns to your body where it rests on the Material Plane,
thereby reviving it from its state of suspended animation. Although
astral projections are able to function on the Astral Plane, their
actions affect only creatures existing on the Astral Plane; a physical
body must be materialized on other planes.

You and your companions may travel through the Astral Plane
indefinitely. Your bodies simply wait behind in a state of suspended
animation until you choose to return your spirits to them. The spell
lasts until you desire to end it, or until it is terminated by some
outside means, such as *dispel magic* cast upon either the physical body
or the astral form, the breaking of the silver cord, or the destruction
of your body back on the Material Plane (which kills you).

*Material Component:* A jacinth worth at least 1,000 gp, plus a silver
bar worth 5 gp for each person to be affected.

Atonement

Abjuration

**Level:** Clr 5, Drd 5

**Components:** V, S, M, F, DF, XP

**Casting Time:** 1 hour

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Living creature touched

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

This spell removes the burden of evil acts or misdeeds from the subject.
The creature seeking atonement must be truly repentant and desirous of
setting right its misdeeds. If the atoning creature committed the evil
act unwittingly or under some form of compulsion, *atonement* operates
normally at no cost to you. However, in the case of a creature atoning
for deliberate misdeeds and acts of a knowing and willful nature, you
must intercede with your deity (requiring you to expend 500 XP) in order
to expunge the subject’s burden. Many casters first assign a subject of
this sort a quest (see *geas/quest*) or similar penance to determine
whether the creature is truly contrite before casting the *atonement*
spell on its behalf.

*Atonement* may be cast for one of several purposes, depending on the
version selected.

*Reverse Magical Alignment Change:* If a creature has had its alignment
magically changed, *atonement* returns its alignment to its original
status at no cost in experience points.

*Restore Class:* A paladin who has lost her class features due to
committing an evil act may have her paladinhood restored to her by this
spell.

*Restore Cleric or Druid Spell Powers:* A cleric or druid who has lost
the ability to cast spells by incurring the anger of his or her deity
may regain that ability by seeking *atonement* from another cleric of
the same deity or another druid. If the transgression was intentional,
the casting cleric loses 500 XP for his intercession. If the
transgression was unintentional, he does not lose XP.

*Redemption or Temptation:* You may cast this spell upon a creature of
an opposing alignment in order to offer it a chance to change its
alignment to match yours. The prospective subject must be present for
the entire casting process. Upon completion of the spell, the subject
freely chooses whether it retains its original alignment or acquiesces
to your offer and changes to your alignment. No duress, compulsion, or
magical influence can force the subject to take advantage of the
opportunity offered if it is unwilling to abandon its old alignment.
This use of the spell does not work on outsiders or any creature
incapable of changing its alignment naturally.

Though the spell description refers to evil acts, *atonement* can also
be used on any creature that has performed acts against its alignment,
whether those acts are evil, good, chaotic, or lawful.

*Note:* Normally, changing alignment is up to the player. This use of
*atonement* simply offers a believable way for a character to change his
or her alignment drastically, suddenly, and definitively.

*Material Component:* Burning incense.

*Focus:* In addition to your holy symbol or normal divine focus, you
need a set of prayer beads (or other prayer device, such as a prayer
wheel or prayer book) worth at least 500 gp.

*XP Cost:* When cast for the benefit of a creature whose guilt was the
result of deliberate acts, the cost to you is 500 XP per casting (see
above).

Augury

Divination

**Level:** Clr 2

**Components:** V, S, M, F

**Casting Time:** 1 minute

**Range:** Personal

**Target:** You

**Duration:** Instantaneous

An *augury* can tell you whether a particular action will bring good or
bad results for you in the immediate future.

The base chance for receiving a meaningful reply is 70% + 1% per caster
level, to a maximum of 90%; this roll is made secretly. A question may
be so straightforward that a successful result is automatic, or so vague
as to have no chance of success. If the *augury* succeeds, you get one
of four results:

• Weal (if the action will probably bring good results).

• Woe (for bad results).

• Weal and woe (for both).

• Nothing (for actions that don’t have especially good or bad results).

If the spell fails, you get the “nothing” result. A cleric who gets the
“nothing” result has no way to tell whether it was the consequence of a
failed or successful *augury.*

The *augury* can see into the future only about half an hour, so
anything that might happen after that does not affect the result. Thus,
the result might not take into account the long-term consequences of a
contemplated action. All *auguries* cast by the same person about the
same topic use the same dice result as the first casting.

*Material Component:* Incense worth at least 25 gp.

*Focus:* A set of marked sticks, bones, or similar tokens of at least 25
gp value.

Awaken

Transmutation

**Level:** Drd 5

**Components:** V, S, DF, XP

**Casting Time:** 24 hours

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Animal or tree touched

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** Will negates

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

You awaken a tree or animal to humanlike sentience. To succeed, you must
make a Will save (DC 10 + the animal’s current HD, or the HD the tree
will have once awakened).

The *awakened* animal or tree is friendly toward you. You have no
special empathy or connection with a creature you awaken, although it
serves you in specific tasks or endeavors if you communicate your
desires to it.

An *awakened* tree has characteristics as if it were an animated object,
except that it gains the plant type and its Intelligence, Wisdom, and
Charisma scores are each 3d6. An *awakened* plant gains the ability to
move its limbs, roots, vines, creepers, and so forth, and it has senses
similar to a human’s.

An *awakened* animal gets 3d6 Intelligence, +1d3 Charisma, and +2 HD.
Its type becomes magical beast (augmented animal). An awakened animal
can’t serve as an animal companion, familiar, or special mount.

An *awakened* tree or animal can speak one language that you know, plus
one additional language that you know per point of Intelligence bonus
(if any).

*XP Cost:* 250 XP.

Baleful Polymorph

Transmutation

**Level:** Drd 5, Sor/Wiz 5

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target:** One creature

**Duration:** Permanent

**Saving Throw:** Fortitude negates, Will partial; see text

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

As *polymorph,* except that you change the subject into a Small or
smaller animal of no more than 1 HD. If the new form would prove fatal
to the creature the subject gets a +4 bonus on the save.

If the spell succeeds, the subject must also make a Will save. If this
second save fails, the creature loses its extraordinary, supernatural,
and spell-like abilities, loses its ability to cast spells (if it had
the ability), and gains the alignment, special abilities, and
Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores of its new form in place of
its own. It still retains its class and level (or HD), as well as all
benefits deriving therefrom (such as base attack bonus, base save
bonuses, and hit points). It retains any class features (other than
spellcasting) that aren’t extraordinary, supernatural, or spell-like
abilities.

Incorporeal or gaseous creatures are immune to being *polymorphed*, and
a creature with the shapechanger subtype can revert to its natural form
as a standard action.

Bane

Enchantment (Compulsion) \[Fear, Mind-Affecting\]

**Level:** Clr 1

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** 50 ft.

**Area:** All enemies within 50 ft.

**Duration:** 1 min./level

**Saving Throw:**Will negates

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

*Bane* fills your enemies with fear and doubt. Each affected creature
takes a –1 penalty on attack rolls and a –1 penalty on saving throws
against fear effects.

*Bane* counters and dispels *bless*.

Banishment

Abjuration

**Level:** Clr 6, Sor/Wiz 7

**Components:** V, S, F

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Targets:** One or more extraplanar creatures, no two of which can be
more than 30 ft. apart

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** Will negates

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

A *banishment* spell is a more powerful version of the *dismissal*
spell. It enables you to force extraplanar creatures out of your home
plane. As many as 2 Hit Dice of creatures per caster level can be
banished.

You can improve the spell’s chance of success by presenting at least one
object or substance that the target hates, fears, or otherwise opposes.
For each such object or substance, you gain a +1 bonus on your caster
level check to overcome the target’s spell resistance (if any), the
saving throw DC increases by 2.

Certain rare items might work twice as well as a normal item for the
purpose of the bonuses (each providing a +2 bonus on the caster level
check against spell resistance and increasing the save DC by 4).

*Arcane Focus:* Any item that is distasteful to the subject (optional,
see above).

Barkskin

Transmutation

**Level:** Drd 2, Rgr 2, Plant 2

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Living creature touched

**Duration:** 10 min./level

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (harmless)

*Barkskin* toughens a creature’s skin. The effect grants a +2
enhancement bonus to the creature’s existing natural armor bonus. This
enhancement bonus increases by 1 for every three caster levels above
3rd, to a maximum of +5 at caster level 12th.

The enhancement bonus provided by *barkskin* stacks with the target’s
natural armor bonus, but not with other enhancement bonuses to natural
armor. A creature without natural armor has an effective natural armor
bonus of +0.

Bear’s Endurance

Transmutation

**Level:** Clr 2, Drd 2, Rgr 2, Sor/Wiz 2

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Creature touched

**Duration:** 1 min./level

**Saving Throw:**Will negates (harmless)

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

The affected creature gains greater vitality and stamina. The spell
grants the subject a +4 enhancement bonus to Constitution, which adds
the usual benefits to hit points, Fortitude saves, Constitution checks,
and so forth.

Hit points gained by a temporary increase in Constitution score are not
temporary hit points. They go away when the subject’s Constitution drops
back to normal. They are not lost first as temporary hit points are.

Bear’s Endurance, Mass

Transmutation

**Level:** Clr 6, Drd 6, Sor/Wiz 6

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Targets:** One creature/level, no two of which can be more than 30 ft.
apart

*Mass bear ’s endurance* works like *bear ’s endurance*, except that it
affects multiple creatures.

Bestow Curse

Necromancy

**Level:** Clr 3, Sor/Wiz 4

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Creature touched

**Duration:** Permanent

**Saving Throw:** Will negates

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

You place a curse on the subject. Choose one of the following three
effects.

• –6 decrease to an ability score (minimum 1).

• –4 penalty on attack rolls, saves, ability checks, and skill checks.

• Each turn, the target has a 50% chance to act normally; otherwise, it
takes no action.

You may also invent your own curse, but it should be no more powerful
than those described above.

The *curse* bestowed by this spell cannot be dispelled, but it can be
removed with a *break enchantment*, *limited wish*, *miracle*, *remove
curse*, or *wish* spell.

*Bestow curse* counters *remove curse*.

Binding

Enchantment (Compulsion) \[Mind-Affecting\]

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 8

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** One minute

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target:** One living creature

**Duration:** See text (D)

**Saving Throw:** Will negates; see text

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

A *binding* spell creates a magical restraint to hold a creature. The
target gets an initial saving throw only if its Hit Dice equal at least
one-half your caster level.

You may have as many as six assistants help you with the spell. For each
assistant who casts *suggestion*, your caster level for this casting of
*binding* increases by 1. For each assistant who casts *dominate animal,
dominate person,* or *dominate monster,* your caster level for this
casting of *binding* increases by a number equal to one-third of that
assistant’s level, provided that the spell’s target is appropriate for a
*binding* spell. Since the assistants’ spells are cast simply to improve
your caster level for the purpose of the *binding* spell, saving throws
and spell resistance against the assistants’ spells are irrelevant. Your
caster level determines whether the target gets an initial Will saving
throw and how long the *binding* lasts. All *binding* spells are
dismissible.

Regardless of the version of *binding* you cast, you can specify
triggering conditions that end the spell and release the creature
whenever they occur. These triggers can be as simple or elaborate as you
desire, but the condition must be reasonable and have a likelihood of
coming to pass. The conditions can be based on a creature’s name,
identity, or alignment but otherwise must be based on observable actions
or qualities. Intangibles such as level, class, Hit Dice, or hit points
don’t qualify. Once the spell is cast, its triggering conditions cannot
be changed. Setting a release condition increases the save DC (assuming
a saving throw is allowed) by 2.

If you are casting any of the first three versions of *binding* (those
with limited durations), you may cast additional *binding* spells to
prolong the effect, since the durations overlap. If you do so, the
target gets a saving throw at the end of the first spell’s duration,
even if your caster level was high enough to disallow an initial saving
throw. If the creature succeeds on this save, all the *binding* spells
it has received are broken.

The *binding* spell has six versions. Choose one of the following
versions when you cast the spell.

*Chaining:* The subject is confined by restraints that generate an
*antipathy* spell affecting all creatures who approach the subject,
except you. The duration is one year per caster level. The subject of
this form of *binding* is confined to the spot it occupied when it
received the spell.

*Slumber:* This version causes the subject to become comatose for as
long as one year per caster level. The subject does not need to eat or
drink while *slumbering*, nor does it age. This form of *binding* is
more difficult to cast than *chaining*, making it slightly easier to
resist. Reduce the spell’s save DC by 1.

*Bound Slumber:* This combination of *chaining* and *slumber* lasts for
as long as one month per caster level. Reduce the save DC by 2.

*Hedged Prison:* The subject is transported to or otherwise brought
within a confined area from which it cannot wander by any means. The
effect is permanent. Reduce the save DC by 3.

*Metamorphosis:* The subject assumes gaseous form, except for its head
or face. It is held harmless in a jar or other container, which may be
transparent if you so choose. The creature remains aware of its
surroundings and can speak, but it cannot leave the container, attack,
or use any of its powers or abilities. The *binding* is permanent. The
subject does not need to breathe, eat, or drink while *metamorphosed*,
nor does it age. Reduce the save DC by 4.

*Minimus Containment:* The subject is shrunk to a height of 1 inch or
even less and held within some gem, jar, or similar object. The
*binding* is permanent. The subject does not need to breathe, eat, or
drink while *contained*, nor does it age. Reduce the save DC by 4.

You can’t dispel a *binding* spell with *dispel magic* or a similar
effect, though an *antimagic field* or *Mage’s disjunction* affects it
normally. A bound extraplanar creature cannot be sent back to its home
plane due to *dismissal, banishment,* or a similar effect.

*Components:* The components for a *binding* spell vary according to the
version of the spell, but they always include a continuous chanting
utterance read from the scroll or spellbook page containing the spell,
somatic gestures, and materials appropriate to the form of *binding*
used. These components can include such items as miniature chains of
special metals, soporific herbs of the rarest sort (for *slumber*
bindings), a bell jar of the finest crystal, and the like.

In addition to the specially made props suited to the specific type of
*binding* (cost 500 gp), the spell requires opals worth at least 500 gp
for each HD of the target and a vellum depiction or carved statuette of
the subject to be captured.

Black Tentacles

Conjuration (Creation)

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 4

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Area:** 20-ft.-radius spread

**Duration:** 1 round/level (D)

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

This spell conjures a field of rubbery black tentacles, each 10 feet
long. These waving members seem to spring forth from the earth, floor,
or whatever surface is underfoot—including water. They grasp and entwine
around creatures that enter the area, holding them fast and crushing
them with great strength.

Every creature within the area of the spell must make a grapple check,
opposed by the grapple check of the tentacles. Treat the tentacles
attacking a particular target as a Large creature with a base attack
bonus equal to your caster level and a Strength score of 19. Thus, its
grapple check modifier is equal to your caster level +8. The tentacles
are immune to all types of damage.

Once the tentacles grapple an opponent, they may make a grapple check
each round on your turn to deal 1d6+4 points of bludgeoning damage. The
tentacles continue to crush the opponent until the spell ends or the
opponent escapes.

Any creature that enters the area of the spell is immediately attacked
by the tentacles. Even creatures who aren’t grappling with the tentacles
may move through the area at only half normal speed.

*Material Component:* A piece of tentacle from a giant octopus or a
giant squid.

Blade Barrier

Evocation \[Force\]

**Level:** Clr 6, Good 6, War 6

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Effect:** Wall of whirling blades up to 20 ft. long/ level, or a
ringed wall of whirling blades with a radius of up to 5 ft. per two
levels; either form 20 ft. high

**Duration:** 1 min./level (D)

**Saving Throw:** Reflex half or Reflex negates; see text

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

An immobile, vertical curtain of whirling blades shaped of pure force
springs into existence. Any creature passing through the wall takes 1d6
points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d6), with a Reflex save for
half damage.

If you evoke the barrier so that it appears where creatures are, each
creature takes damage as if passing through the wall. Each such creature
can avoid the wall (ending up on the side of its choice) and thus take
no damage by making a successful Reflex save.

A *blade barrier* provides cover (+4 bonus to AC, +2 bonus on Reflex
saves) against attacks made through it.

Blasphemy

Evocation \[Evil, Sonic\]

**Level:** Clr 7, Evil 7

**Components:** V

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** 40 ft.

**Area:** Nonevil creatures in a 40-ft.-radius spread centered on you

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** None or Will negates; see text

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

Any nonevil creature within the area of a *blasphemy* spell suffers the
following ill effects.

<table>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><h2 id="hd">HD</h2></td>
<td><strong>Effect</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Equal to caster level</td>
<td>Dazed</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Up to caster level –1</td>
<td>Weakened, dazed</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Up to caster level –5</td>
<td>Paralyzed, weakened, dazed</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Up to caster level –10</td>
<td>Killed, paralyzed, weakened, dazed</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The effects are cumulative and concurrent.

No saving throw is allowed against these effects.

*Dazed:* The creature can take no actions for 1 round, though it defends
itself normally.

*Weakened:* The creature’s Strength score decreases by 2d6 points for
2d4 rounds.

*Paralyzed:* The creature is paralyzed and helpless for 1d10 minutes.

*Killed:* Living creatures die. Undead creatures are destroyed.

Furthermore, if you are on your home plane when you cast this spell,
nonevil extraplanar creatures within the area are instantly banished
back to their home planes. Creatures so banished cannot return for at
least 24 hours. This effect takes place regardless of whether the
creatures hear the *blasphemy.* The banishment effect allows a Will save
(at a –4 penalty) to negate.

Creatures whose Hit Dice exceed your caster level are unaffected by
*blasphemy.*

Bless

Enchantment (Compulsion) \[Mind-Affecting\]

**Level:** Clr 1, Pal 1

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** 50 ft.

**Area:** The caster and all allies within a 50-ft. burst, centered on
the caster

**Duration:** 1 min./level

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (harmless)

*Bless* fills your allies with courage. Each ally gains a +1 morale
bonus on attack rolls and on saving throws against fear effects.

*Bless* counters and dispels *bane*.

Bless Water

Transmutation \[Good\]

**Level:** Clr 1, Pal 1

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 1 minute

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Flask of water touched

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** Will negates (object)

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (object)

This transmutation imbues a flask (1 pint) of water with positive
energy, turning it into holy water.

*Material Component:* 5 pounds of powdered silver (worth 25 gp).

Bless Weapon

Transmutation

**Level:** Pal 1

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Weapon touched

**Duration:** 1 min./level

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

This transmutation makes a weapon strike true against evil foes. The
weapon is treated as having a +1 enhancement bonus for the purpose of
bypassing the damage reduction of evil creatures or striking evil
incorporeal creatures (though the spell doesn’t grant an actual
enhancement bonus). The weapon also becomes good, which means it can
bypass the damage reduction of certain creatures. (This effect overrides
and suppresses any other alignment the weapon might have.) Individual
arrows or bolts can be transmuted, but affected projectile weapons (such
as bows) don’t confer the benefit to the projectiles they shoot.

In addition, all critical hit rolls against evil foes are automatically
successful, so every threat is a critical hit. This last effect does not
apply to any weapon that already has a magical effect related to
critical hits, such as a keen weapon or a vorpal sword.

Blight

Necromancy

**Level:** Drd 4, Sor/Wiz 5

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** Fortitude half; see text

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

This spell withers a single plant of any size. An affected plant
creature takes 1d6 points of damage per level (maximum 15d6) and may
attempt a Fortitude saving throw for half damage. A plant that isn’t a
creature doesn’t receive a save and immediately withers and dies.

This spell has no effect on the soil or surrounding plant life.

Blindness/Deafness

Necromancy

**Level:** Brd 2, Clr 3, Sor/Wiz 2

**Components:** V

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Target:** One living creature

**Duration:** Permanent (D)

**Saving Throw:** Fortitude negates

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

You call upon the powers of unlife to render the subject blinded or
deafened, as you choose.

Blink

Transmutation

**Level:** Brd 3, Sor/Wiz 3

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Personal

**Target:** You

**Duration:** 1 round/level (D)

You “blink” back and forth between the Material Plane and the Ethereal
Plane. You look as though you’re winking in and out of reality very
quickly and at random.

*Blinking* has several effects, as follows.

Physical attacks against you have a 50% miss chance, and the Blind-Fight
feat doesn’t help opponents, since you’re ethereal and not merely
invisible. If the attack is capable of striking ethereal creatures, the
miss chance is only 20% (for concealment).

If the attacker can see invisible creatures, the miss chance is also
only 20%. (For an attacker who can both see and strike ethereal
creatures, there is no miss chance.) Likewise, your own attacks have a
20% miss chance, since you sometimes go ethereal just as you are about
to strike.

Any individually targeted spell has a 50% chance to fail against you
while you’re *blinking* unless your attacker can target invisible,
ethereal creatures. Your own spells have a 20% chance to activate just
as you go ethereal, in which case they typically do not affect the
Material Plane.

While *blinking*, you take only half damage from area attacks (but full
damage from those that extend onto the Ethereal Plane). You strike as an
invisible creature (with a +2 bonus on attack rolls), denying your
target any Dexterity bonus to AC.

You take only half damage from falling, since you fall only while you
are material.

While *blinking*, you can step through (but not see through) solid
objects. For each 5 feet of solid material you walk through, there is a
50% chance that you become material. If this occurs, you are shunted off
to the nearest open space and take 1d6 points of damage per 5 feet so
traveled. You can move at only three-quarters speed (because movement on
the Ethereal Plane is at half speed, and you spend about half your time
there and half your time material.)

Since you spend about half your time on the Ethereal Plane, you can see
and even attack ethereal creatures. You interact with ethereal creatures
roughly the same way you interact with material ones.

An ethereal creature is invisible, incorporeal, and capable of moving in
any direction, even up or down. As an incorporeal creature, you can move
through solid objects, including living creatures.

An ethereal creature can see and hear the Material Plane, but everything
looks gray and insubstantial. Sight and hearing on the Material Plane
are limited to 60 feet.

Force effects and abjurations affect you normally. Their effects extend
onto the Ethereal Plane from the Material Plane, but not vice versa. An
ethereal creature can’t attack material creatures, and spells you cast
while ethereal affect only other ethereal things. Certain material
creatures or objects have attacks or effects that work on the Ethereal
Plane. Treat other ethereal creatures and objects as material.

Blur

Illusion (Glamer)

**Level:** Brd 2,Sor/Wiz 2

**Components:** V

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Creature touched

**Duration:** 1 min./level (D)

**Saving Throw:** Will negates (harmless)

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (harmless)

The subject’s outline appears blurred, shifting and wavering. This
distortion grants the subject concealment (20% miss chance).

A *see invisibility* spell does not counteract the *blur* effect, but a
*true seeing* spell does.

Opponents that cannot see the subject ignore the spell’s effect (though
fighting an unseen opponent carries penalties of its own).

Break Enchantment

Abjuration

**Level:** Brd 4, Clr 5, Luck 5, Pal 4, Sor/Wiz 5

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 minute

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Targets:** Up to one creature per level, all within 30 ft. of each
other

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** See text

**Spell Resistance:** No

This spell frees victims from enchantments, transmutations, and curses.
*Break enchantment* can reverse even an instantaneous effect. For each
such effect, you make a caster level check (1d20 + caster level, maximum
+15) against a DC of 11 + caster level of the effect. Success means that
the creature is free of the spell, curse, or effect. For a cursed magic
item, the DC is 25.

If the spell is one that cannot be dispelled by *dispel magic*, *break
enchantment* works only if that spell is 5th level or lower.

If the effect comes from some permanent magic item *break enchantment*
does not remove the curse from the item, but it does frees the victim
from the item’s effects.

Bull’s Strength

Transmutation

**Level:** Clr 2, Drd 2, Pal 2, Sor/Wiz 2, Strength 2

**Components:** V, S, M/DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Creature touched

**Duration:** 1 min./level

**Saving Throw:**Will negates (harmless)

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (harmless)

The subject becomes stronger. The spell grants a +4 enhancement bonus to
Strength, adding the usual benefits to melee attack rolls, melee damage
rolls, and other uses of the Strength modifier.

*Arcane Material Component:* A few hairs, or a pinch of dung, from a
bull.

Bull’s Strength, Mass

Transmutation

**Level:** Clr 6, Drd 6, Sor/Wiz 6

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Targets:** One creature/level, no two of which can be more than 30 ft.
apart

This spell functions like *bull’s strength*, except that it affects
multiple creatures.

Burning Hands

Evocation \[Fire\]

**Level:** Fire 1, Sor/Wiz 1

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** 15 ft.

**Area:** Cone-shaped burst

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** Reflex half

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

A cone of searing flame shoots from your fingertips. Any creature in the
area of the flames takes 1d4 points of fire damage per caster level
(maximum 5d4). Flammable materials burn if the flames touch them. A
character can extinguish burning items as a full-round action.
