This material is Open Game Content, and is licensed for public use under
the terms of the Open Game License v1.0a.

SPELLS (S)

Sanctuary

Abjuration

**Level:** Clr 1, Protection 1

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Creature touched

**Duration:** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw:** Will negates

**Spell Resistance:** No

Any opponent attempting to strike or otherwise directly attack the
warded creature, even with a targeted spell, must attempt a Will save.
If the save succeeds, the opponent can attack normally and is unaffected
by that casting of the spell. If the save fails, the opponent can’t
follow through with the attack, that part of its action is lost, and it
can’t directly attack the warded creature for the duration of the spell.
Those not attempting to attack the subject remain unaffected. This spell
does not prevent the warded creature from being attacked or affected by
area or effect spells. The subject cannot attack without breaking the
spell but may use nonattack spells or otherwise act.

Scare

Necromancy \[Fear, Mind-Affecting\]

**Level:** Brd 2, Sor/Wiz 2

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Targets:** One living creature per three levels, no two of which can
be more than 30 ft. apart

**Duration:** 1 round/level or 1 round; see text for *cause fear*

**Saving Throw:** Will partial

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

This spell functions like *cause fear,* except that it causes all
targeted creatures of less than 6 HD to become frightened.

*Material Component:* A bit of bone from an undead skeleton, zombie,
ghoul, ghast, or mummy.

Scintillating Pattern

Illusion (Pattern) \[Mind-Affecting\]

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 8

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Effect:** Colorful lights in a 20-ft.-radius spread

**Duration:** Concentration + 2 rounds

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

A twisting pattern of discordant, coruscating colors weaves through the
air, affecting creatures within it. The spell affects a total number of
Hit Dice of creatures equal to your caster level (maximum 20). Creatures
with the fewest HD are affected first; and, among creatures with equal
HD, those who are closest to the spell’s point of origin are affected
first. Hit Dice that are not sufficient to affect a creature are wasted.
The spell affects each subject according to its Hit Dice.

*6 or less:* Unconscious for 1d4 rounds, then stunned for 1d4 rounds,
and then *confused* for 1d4 rounds. (Treat an unconscious result as
stunned for nonliving creatures.)

*7 to 12:* Stunned for 1d4 rounds, then *confused* for 1d4 rounds.

*13 or more: Confused* for 1d4 rounds.

Sightless creatures are not affected by *scintillating pattern*.

*Material Component:* A small crystal prism.

Scorching Ray

Evocation \[Fire\]

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 2

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Effect:** One or more rays

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

You blast your enemies with fiery rays. You may fire one ray, plus one
additional ray for every four levels beyond 3rd (to a maximum of three
rays at 11th level). Each ray requires a ranged touch attack to hit and
deals 4d6 points of fire damage.

The rays may be fired at the same or different targets, but all bolts
must be aimed at targets within 30 feet of each other and fired
simultaneously.

Screen

Illusion (Glamer)

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 8, Trickery 7

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 10 minutes

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Area:** 30-ft. cube/level (S)

**Duration:** 24 hours

**Saving Throw:** None or Will disbelief (if interacted with); see text

**Spell Resistance:** No

This spell combines several elements to create a powerful protection
from scrying and direct observation. When casting the spell, you dictate
what will and will not be observed in the spell’s area. The illusion
created must be stated in general terms. Once the conditions are set,
they cannot be changed.

Attempts to scry the area automatically detect the image stated by you
with no save allowed. Sight and sound are appropriate to the illusion
created.

Direct observation may allow a save (as per a normal illusion), if there
is cause to disbelieve what is seen. Even entering the area does not
cancel the illusion or necessarily allow a save, assuming that hidden
beings take care to stay out of the way of those affected by the
illusion.

Scrying

Divination (Scrying)

**Level:** Brd 3, Clr 5, Drd 4, Sor/Wiz 4

**Components:** V, S, M/DF, F

**Casting Time:** 1 hour

**Range:** See text

**Effect** Magical sensor

**Duration:** 1 min./level

**Saving Throw:** Will negates

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

You can see and hear some creature, which may be at any distance. If the
subject succeeds on a Will save, the scrying attempt simply fails. The
difficulty of the save depends on how well you know the subject and what
sort of physical connection (if any) you have to that creature.
Furthermore, if the subject is on another plane, it gets a +5 bonus on
its Will save.

<table>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><h2 id="knowledge">Knowledge</h2></td>
<td><h2 id="will-save-modifier">Will Save Modifier</h2></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>None<strong><sup>1</sup></strong></td>
<td>+10</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Secondhand (you have heard of the subject)</td>
<td>+5</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Firsthand (you have met the subject)</td>
<td>+0</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Familiar (you know the subject well)</td>
<td>–5</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>1 You must have some sort of connection to a creature you have no knowledge of.</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>Connection</strong></td>
<td><h3 id="will-save-modifier-1">Will Save Modifier</h3></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Likeness or picture</td>
<td>–2</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Possession or garment</td>
<td>–4</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Body part, lock of hair, bit of nail, etc.</td>
<td>–10</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

If the save fails, you can see and hear the subject and the subject’s
immediate surroundings (approximately 10 feet in all directions of the
subject). If the subject moves, the sensor follows at a speed of up to
150 feet.

As with all divination (scrying) spells, the sensor has your full visual
acuity, including any magical effects. In addition, the following spells
have a 5% chance per caster level of operating through the sensor:
*detect chaos*, *detect evil*, *detect good*, *detect law*, *detect
magic*, and *message*.

If the save succeeds, you can’t attempt to scry on that subject again
for at least 24 hours.

*Arcane Material Component:* The eye of a hawk, an eagle, or a roc, plus
nitric acid, copper, and zinc.

*Wizard, Sorcerer, or Bard Focus:* A mirror of finely wrought and highly
polished silver costing not less than 1,000 gp. The mirror must be at
least 2 feet by 4 feet.

*Cleric Focus:* A holy water font costing not less than 100 gp.

*Druid Focus:* A natural pool of water.

Scrying, Greater

Divination (Scrying)

**Level:** Brd 6, Clr 7, Drd 7, Sor/Wiz 7

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Duration:** 1 hour/level

This spell functions like *scrying*, except as noted above.
Additionally, all of the following spells function reliably through the
sensor: *detect chaos*, *detect evil*, *detect good*, *detect law*,
*detect magic*, *message*, *read magic*, and *tongues*.

Sculpt Sound

Transmutation

**Level:** Brd 3

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Targets:** One creature or object/level, no two of which can be more
than 30 ft. apart

**Duration:** 1 hour/level (D)

**Saving Throw:** Will negates (object)

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (object)

You change the sounds that creatures or objects make. You can create
sounds where none exist, deaden sounds, or transform sounds into other
sounds. All affected creatures or objects must be transmuted in the same
way. Once the transmutation is made, you cannot change it.

You can change the qualities of sounds but cannot create words with
which you are unfamiliar yourself.

A spellcaster whose voice is changed dramatically is unable to cast
spells with verbal components.

Searing Light

Evocation

**Level:** Clr 3, Sun 3

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Effect:** Ray

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

Focusing divine power like a ray of the sun, you project a blast of
light from your open palm. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack to
strike your target. A creature struck by this ray of light takes 1d8
points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d8). An undead creature
takes 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 10d6), and an
undead creature particularly vulnerable to bright light takes 1d8 points
of damage per caster level (maximum 10d8). A construct or inanimate
object takes only 1d6 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum
5d6).

Secret Chest

Conjuration (Summoning)

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 5

**Components:** V, S, F

**Casting Time:** 10 minutes

**Range:** See text

**Target:** One chest and up to 1 cu. ft. of goods/caster level

**Duration:** Sixty days or until discharged

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

You hide a chest on the Ethereal Plane for as long as sixty days and can
retrieve it at will. The chest can contain up to 1 cubic foot of
material per caster level (regardless of the chest’s actual size, which
is about 3 feet by 2 feet by 2 feet). If any living creatures are in the
chest, there is a 75% chance that the spell simply fails. Once the chest
is hidden, you can retrieve it by concentrating (a standard action), and
it appears next to you.

The chest must be exceptionally well crafted and expensive, constructed
for you by master crafters. The cost of such a chest is never less than
5,000 gp. Once it is constructed, you must make a tiny replica (of the
same materials and perfect in every detail), so that the miniature of
the chest appears to be a perfect copy. (The replica costs 50 gp.) You
can have but one pair of these chests at any given time—even a *wish*
spell does not allow more. The chests are nonmagical and can be fitted
with locks, wards, and so on, just as any normal chest can be.

To hide the chest, you cast the spell while touching both the chest and
the replica. The chest vanishes into the Ethereal Plane. You need the
replica to recall the chest. After sixty days, there is a cumulative
chance of 5% per day that the chest is irretrievably lost. If the
miniature of the chest is lost or destroyed, there is no way, not even
with a *wish* spell, that the large chest can be summoned back, although
an extraplanar expedition might be mounted to find it.

Living things in the chest eat, sleep, and age normally, and they die if
they run out of food, air, water, or whatever they need to survive.

*Focus:* The chest and its replica.

Secret Page

Transmutation

**Level:** Brd 3, Sor/Wiz 3

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 10 minutes

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Page touched, up to 3 sq. ft. in size

**Duration:** Permanent

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

S*ecret page* alters the contents of a page so that they appear to be
something entirely different. The text of a spell can be changed to show
even another spell. *Explosive runes* or *sepia snake sigil* can be cast
upon the *secret page.*

A *comprehend languages* spell alone cannot reveal a *secret page*’s
contents. You are able to reveal the original contents by speaking a
special word. You can then peruse the actual page, and return it to its
*secret page* form at will. You can also remove the spell by double
repetition of the special word. A *detect magic* spell reveals dim magic
on the page in question but does not reveal its true contents. T*rue
seeing* reveals the presence of the hidden material but does not reveal
the contents unless cast in combination with *comprehend languages.* A
*secret page* spell can be dispelled, and the hidden writings can be
destroyed by means of an *erase* spell.

*Material Component:* Powdered herring scales and will-o’-wisp essence.

Secure Shelter

Conjuration (Creation)

**Level:** Brd 4, Sor/Wiz 4

**Components:** V, S, M, F; see text

**Casting Time:** 10 minutes

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Effect:** 20-ft.-square structure

**Duration:** 2 hours/level (D)

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

You conjure a sturdy cottage or lodge made of material that is common in
the area where the spell is cast. The floor is level, clean, and dry. In
all respects the lodging resembles a normal cottage, with a sturdy door,
two shuttered windows, and a small fireplace.

The shelter has no heating or cooling source (other than natural
insulation qualities). Therefore, it must be heated as a normal
dwelling, and extreme heat adversely affects it and its occupants. The
dwelling does, however, provide considerable security otherwise—it is as
strong as a normal stone building, regardless of its material
composition. The dwelling resists flames and fire as if it were stone.
It is impervious to normal missiles (but not the sort cast by siege
engines or giants).

The door, shutters, and even chimney are secure against intrusion, the
former two being *arcane locked* and the latter secured by an iron grate
at the top and a narrow flue. In addition, these three areas are
protected by an *alarm* spell. Finally, an *unseen servant* is conjured
to provide service to you for the duration of the shelter.

The *secure shelter* contains rude furnishings —eight bunks, a trestle
table, eight stools, and a writing desk.

*Material Component:* A square chip of stone, crushed lime, a few grains
of sand, a sprinkling of water, and several splinters of wood. These
must be augmented by the components of the *unseen servant* spell
(string and a bit of wood) if this benefit is to be included.

*Focus:* The focus of the *alarm* spell (silver wire and a tiny bell) if
this benefit is to be included.

See Invisibility

Divination

**Level:** Brd 3, Sor/Wiz 2

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Personal

**Target:** You

**Duration:** 10 min./level (D)

You can see any objects or beings that are invisible within your range
of vision, as well as any that are ethereal, as if they were normally
visible. Such creatures are visible to you as translucent shapes,
allowing you easily to discern the difference between visible,
invisible, and ethereal creatures.

The spell does not reveal the method used to obtain invisibility. It
does not reveal illusions or enable you to see through opaque objects.
It does not reveal creatures who are simply hiding, concealed, or
otherwise hard to see.

*See invisibility* can be made permanent with a *permanency* spell.

*Material Component:* A pinch of talc and a small sprinkling of powdered
silver.

Seeming

Illusion (Glamer)

**Level:** Brd 5, Sor/Wiz 5

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Targets:** One creature per two levels, no two of which can be more
than 30 ft. apart

**Duration:** 12 hours (D)

**Saving Throw:** Will negates or Will disbelief (if interacted with)

**Spell Resistance:** Yes or No; see text

This spell functions like *disguise self,* except that you can change
the appearance of other people as well. Affected creatures resume their
normal appearances if slain.

Unwilling targets can negate the spell’s effect on them by making Will
saves or with spell resistance.

Sending

Evocation

**Level:** Clr 4, Sor/Wiz 5

**Components:** V, S, M/DF

**Casting Time:** 10 minutes

**Range:** See text

**Target:** One creature

**Duration:** 1 round; see text

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

You contact a particular creature with which you are familiar and send a
short message of twenty-five words or less to the subject. The subject
recognizes you if it knows you. It can answer in like manner
immediately. A creature with an Intelligence score as low as 1 can
understand the *sending,* though the subject’s ability to react is
limited as normal by its Intelligence score. Even if the *sending* is
received, the subject is not obligated to act upon it in any manner.

If the creature in question is not on the same plane of existence as you
are, there is a 5% chance that the *sending* does not arrive. (Local
conditions on other planes may worsen this chance considerably.)

*Arcane Material Component:* A short piece of fine copper wire.

Sepia Snake Sigil

Conjuration (Creation) \[Force\]

**Level:** Brd 3, Sor/Wiz 3

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 10 minutes

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** One touched book or written work

**Duration:** Permanent or until discharged; until released or 1d4 days
+ one day/level; see text

**Saving Throw:** Reflex negates

**Spell Resistance:** No

When you cast *sepia snake sigil,* a small symbol appears in the text of
one written work such as a book, scroll, or map. The text containing the
symbol must be at least twenty-five words long. When anyone reads the
text containing the symbol, the *sepia snake* springs into being and
strikes the reader, provided there is line of effect between the symbol
and the reader.

Simply seeing the enspelled text is not sufficient to trigger the spell;
the subject must deliberately read it. The target is entitled to a save
to evade the snake’s strike. If it succeeds, the *sepia snake*
dissipates in a flash of brown light accompanied by a puff of
dun-colored smoke and a loud noise. If the target fails its save, it is
engulfed in a shimmering amber field of force and immobilized until
released, either at your command or when 1d4 days + one day per caster
level have elapsed.

While trapped in the amber field of force, the subject does not age,
breathe, grow hungry, sleep, or regain spells. It is preserved in a
state of suspended animation, unaware of its surroundings. It can be
damaged by outside forces (and perhaps even killed), since the field
provides no protection against physical injury. However, a dying subject
does not lose hit points or become stable until the spell ends.

The hidden sigil cannot be detected by normal observation, and *detect
magic* reveals only that the entire text is magical.

A *dispel magic* can remove the sigil. An *erase* spell destroys the
entire page of text.

*Sepia snake sigil* can be cast in combination with other spells that
hide or garble text, such as *secret page.*

*Material Component:* 500 gp worth of powdered amber, a scale from any
snake, and a pinch of mushroom spores.

Sequester

Abjuration

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 7

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** One willing creature or object (up to a 2-ft. cube/level)
touched

**Duration:** One day/level (D)

**Saving Throw:** None or Will negates (object)

**Spell Resistance:** No or Yes (object)

When cast, this spell not only prevents divination spells from working
to detect or locate the creature or object affected by *sequester,* it
also renders the affected creature or object invisible to any form of
sight or seeing (as the *invisibility* spell). The spell does not
prevent the subject from being discovered through tactile means or
through the use of devices. Creatures affected by *sequester* become
comatose and are effectively in a state of suspended animation until the
spell wears off or is dispelled.

*Note:* The Will save prevents an attended or magical object from being
*sequestered.* There is no save to see the *sequestered* creature or
object or to detect it with a divination spell.

*Material Component:* A basilisk eyelash, gum arabic, and a dram of
whitewash.

Shades

Illusion (Shadow)

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 9

This spell functions like *shadow conjuration,* except that it mimics
sorcerer and wizard conjuration spells of 8th level or lower. The
illusory conjurations created deal four-fifths (80%) damage to
nonbelievers, and nondamaging effects are 80% likely to work against
nonbelievers.

Shadow Conjuration

Illusion (Shadow)

**Level:** Brd 4, Sor/Wiz 4

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** See text

**Effect:** See text

**Duration:** See text

**Saving Throw:** Will disbelief (if interacted with); varies; see text

**Spell Resistance:** Yes; see text

You use material from the Plane of Shadow to shape quasi-real illusions
of one or more creatures, objects, or forces. *Shadow conjuration* can
mimic any sorcerer or wizard conjuration (summoning) or conjuration
(creation) spell of 3rd level or lower.

*Shadow conjurations* are actually one-fifth (20%) as strong as the real
things, though creatures who believe the *shadow conjurations* to be
real are affected by them at full strength.

Any creature that interacts with the conjured object, force, or creature
can make a Will save to recognize its true nature.

Spells that deal damage have normal effects unless the affected creature
succeeds on a Will save. Each disbelieving creature takes only one-fifth
(20%) damage from the attack. If the disbelieved attack has a special
effect other than damage, that effect is only 20% likely to occur.
Regardless of the result of the save to disbelieve, an affected creature
is also allowed any save that the spell being simulated allows, but the
save DC is set according to *shadow conjuration*’s level (4th) rather
than the spell’s normal level. In addition, any effect created by
*shadow conjuration* allows spell resistance, even if the spell it is
simulating does not. Shadow objects or substances have normal effects
except against those who disbelieve them.

Against disbelievers, they are 20% likely to work.

A shadow creature has one-fifth the hit points of a normal creature of
its kind (regardless of whether it’s recognized as shadowy). It deals
normal damage and has all normal abilities and weaknesses. Against a
creature that recognizes it as a shadow creature, however, the shadow
creature’s damage is one-fifth (20%) normal, and all special abilities
that do not deal lethal damage are only 20% likely to work. (Roll for
each use and each affected character separately.) Furthermore, the
shadow creature’s AC bonuses are one-fifth as large.

A creature that succeeds on its save sees the *shadow conjurations* as
transparent images superimposed on vague, shadowy forms.

Objects automatically succeed on their Will saves against this spell.

Shadow Conjuration, Greater

Illusion (Shadow)

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 7

This spell functions like *shadow conjuration,* except that it can
duplicate any sorcerer or wizard conjuration (summoning) or conjuration
(creation) spell of 6th level or lower. The illusory conjurations
created deal three-fifths (60%) damage to nonbelievers, and nondamaging
effects are 60% likely to work against nonbelievers.

Shadow Evocation

Illusion (Shadow)

**Level:** Brd 5, Sor/Wiz 5

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** See text

**Effect:** See text

**Duration:** See text

**Saving Throw:** Will disbelief (if interacted with)

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

You tap energy from the Plane of Shadow to cast a quasi-real, illusory
version of a sorcerer or wizard evocation spell of 4th level or lower.
(For a spell with more than one level, use the best one applicable to
you.)

Spells that deal damage have normal effects unless an affected creature
succeeds on a Will save. Each disbelieving creature takes only one-fifth
damage from the attack. If the disbelieved attack has a special effect
other than damage, that effect is one-fifth as strong (if applicable) or
only 20% likely to occur. If recognized as a *shadow evocation,* a
damaging spell deals only one-fifth (20%) damage. Regardless of the
result of the save to disbelieve, an affected creature is also allowed
any save (or spell resistance) that the spell being simulated allows,
but the save DC is set according to *shadow evocation’*s level (5th)
rather than the spell’s normal level.

Nondamaging effects have normal effects except against those who
disbelieve them. Against disbelievers, they have no effect.

Objects automatically succeed on their Will saves against this spell.

Shadow Evocation, Greater

Illusion (Shadow)

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 8

This spell functions like *shadow evocation,* except that it enables you
to create partially real, illusory versions of sorcerer or wizard
evocation spells of 7th level or lower. If recognized as a *greater
shadow evocation*, a damaging spell deals only three-fifths (60%)
damage.

Shadow Walk

Illusion (Shadow)

**Level:** Brd 5, Sor/Wiz 6

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Targets:** Up to one touched creature/ level

**Duration:** 1 hour/level (D)

**Saving Throw:** Will negates

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

To use the *shadow walk* spell, you must be in an area of shadowy
illumination. You and any creature you touch are then transported along
a coiling path of shadowstuff to the edge of the Material Plane where it
borders the Plane of Shadow. The effect is largely illusory, but the
path is quasi-real. You can take more than one creature along with you
(subject to your level limit), but all must be touching each other.

In the region of shadow, you move at a rate of 50 miles per hour, moving
normally on the borders of the Plane of Shadow but much more rapidly
relative to the Material Plane. Thus, you can use this spell to travel
rapidly by stepping onto the Plane of Shadow, moving the desired
distance, and then stepping back onto the Material Plane.

Because of the blurring of reality between the Plane of Shadow and the
Material Plane, you can’t make out details of the terrain or areas you
pass over during transit, nor can you predict perfectly where your
travel will end. It’s impossible to judge distances accurately, making
the spell virtually useless for scouting or spying. Furthermore, when
the spell effect ends, you are shunted 1d10x100 feet in a random
horizontal direction from your desired endpoint. If this would place you
within a solid object, you are shunted 1d10x1,000 feet in the same
direction. If this would still place you within a solid object, you (and
any creatures with you) are shunted to the nearest empty space
available, but the strain of this activity renders each creature
fatigued (no save).

*Shadow walk* can also be used to travel to other planes that border on
the Plane of Shadow, but this usage requires the transit of the Plane of
Shadow to arrive at a border with another plane of reality. The transit
of the Plane of Shadow requires 1d4 hours.

Any creatures touched by you when *shadow walk* is cast also make the
transition to the borders of the Plane of Shadow.

They may opt to follow you, wander off through the plane, or stumble
back into the Material Plane (50% chance for either of the latter
results if they are lost or abandoned by you). Creatures unwilling to
accompany you into the Plane of Shadow receive a Will saving throw,
negating the effect if successful.

Shambler

Conjuration (Creation)

**Level:** Drd 9, Plant 9

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Effect:** Three or more shambling mounds, no two of which can be more
than 30 ft. apart; see text

**Duration:** Seven days or seven months (D); see text

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

The *shambler* spell creates 1d4+2 shambling mounds with 11 HD each. The
creatures willingly aid you in combat or battle, perform a specific
mission, or serve as bodyguards. The creatures remain with you for seven
days unless you dismiss them. If the shamblers are created only for
guard duty, however, the duration of the spell is seven months. In this
case, the shamblers can only be ordered to guard a specific site or
location. Shamblers summoned to guard duty cannot move outside the
spell’s range, which is measured from the point where each first
appeared.

The shamblers have resistance to fire as normal shambling mounds do only
if the terrain is rainy, marshy, or damp.

Shapechange

Transmutation

**Level:** Animal 9, Drd 9, Sor/Wiz 9

**Components:** V, S, F

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Personal

**Target:** You

**Duration:** 10 min./level (D)

This spell functions like *polymorph,* except that it enables you to
assume the form of any single nonunique creature (of any type) from Fine
to Colossal size. The assumed form cannot have more than your caster
level in Hit Dice (to a maximum of 25 HD). Unlike *polymorph,* this
spell allows incorporeal or gaseous forms to be assumed.

You gain all extraordinary and supernatural abilities (both attacks and
qualities) of the assumed form, but you lose your own supernatural
abilities. You also gain the type of the new form in place of your own.
The new form does not disorient you. Parts of your body or pieces of
equipment that are separated from you do not revert to their original
forms.

You can become just about anything you are familiar with. You can change
form once each round as a free action. The change takes place either
immediately before your regular action or immediately after it, but not
during the action. If you use this spell to create a disguise, you get a
+10 bonus on your Disguise check.

*Focus:* A jade circlet worth no less than 1,500 gp, which you must
place on your head when casting the spell. (The focus melds into your
new form when you change shape.)

Shatter

Evocation \[Sonic\]

**Level:** Brd 2, Chaos 2, Clr 2, Destruction 2, Sor/Wiz 2

**Components:** V, S, M/DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Area or Target:** 5-ft.-radius spread; or one solid object or one
crystalline creature

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** Will negates (object); Will negates (object) or
Fortitude half; see text

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (object)

*Shatter* creates a loud, ringing noise that breaks brittle, nonmagical
objects; sunders a single solid, nonmagical object; or damages a
crystalline creature.

Used as an area attack, *shatter* destroys nonmagical objects of
crystal, glass, ceramic, or porcelain. All such objects within a 5-foot
radius of the point of origin are smashed into dozens of pieces by the
spell. Objects weighing more than 1 pound per your level are not
affected, but all other objects of the appropriate composition are
shattered.

Alternatively, you can target *shatter* against a single solid object,
regardless of composition, weighing up to 10 pounds per caster level.
Targeted against a crystalline creature (of any weight), *shatter* deals
1d6 points of sonic damage per caster level (maximum 10d6), with a
Fortitude save for half damage.

*Arcane Material Component:* A chip of mica.

Shield

Abjuration \[Force\]

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 1

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Personal

**Target:** You

**Duration:** 1 min./level (D)

*Shield* creates an invisible, tower shield-sized mobile disk of force
that hovers in front of you. It negates *magic missile* attacks directed
at you. The disk also provides a +4 shield bonus to AC. This bonus
applies against incorporeal touch attacks, since it is a force effect.
The *shield* has no armor check penalty or arcane spell failure chance.
Unlike with a normal tower shield, you can’t use the *shield* spell for
cover.

Shield of Faith

Abjuration

**Level:** Clr 1

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Creature touched

**Duration:** 1 min./level

**Saving Throw:** Will negates (harmless)

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (harmless)

This spell creates a shimmering, magical field around the touched
creature that averts attacks. The spell grants the subject a +2
deflection bonus to AC, with an additional +1 to the bonus for every six
levels you have (maximum +5 deflection bonus at 18th level).

*Material Component:* A small parchment with a bit of holy text written
upon it.

Shield of Law

Abjuration \[Lawful\]

**Level:** Clr 8, Law 8

**Components:** V, S, F

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** 20 ft.

**Targets:** One creature/level in a 20-ft.-radius burst centered on you

**Duration:** 1 round/level (D)

**Saving Throw:** See text

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (harmless)

A dim, blue glow surrounds the subjects, protecting them from attacks,
granting them resistance to spells cast by chaotic creatures, and
*slowing* chaotic creatures when they strike the subjects. This
abjuration has four effects.

First, each warded creature gains a +4 deflection bonus to AC and a +4
resistance bonus on saves. Unlike *protection from chaos*, this benefit
applies against all attacks, not just against attacks by chaotic
creatures.

Second, a warded creature gains spell resistance 25 against chaotic
spells and spells cast by chaotic creatures.

Third, the abjuration blocks possession and mental influence, just as
*protection from chaos* does.

Finally, if a chaotic creature succeeds on a melee attack against a
warded creature, the attacker is *slowed* (Will save negates, as the
*slow* spell, but against *shield of law*’s save DC).

*Focus:* A tiny reliquary containing some sacred relic, such as a scrap
of parchment from a lawful text. The reliquary costs at least 500 gp.

Shield Other

Abjuration

**Level:** Clr 2, Pal 2, Protection 2

**Components:** V, S, F

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target:** One creature

**Duration:** 1 hour/level (D)

**Saving Throw:** Will negates (harmless)

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (harmless)

This spell wards the subject and creates a mystic connection between you
and the subject so that some of its wounds are transferred to you. The
subject gains a +1 deflection bonus to AC and a +1 resistance bonus on
saves. Additionally, the subject takes only half damage from all wounds
and attacks (including that dealt by special abilities) that deal hit
point damage. The amount of damage not taken by the warded creature is
taken by you. Forms of harm that do not involve hit points, such as
*charm* effects, temporary ability damage, level draining, and death
effects, are not affected. If the subject suffers a reduction of hit
points from a lowered Constitution score, the reduction is not split
with you because it is not hit point damage. When the spell ends,
subsequent damage is no longer divided between the subject and you, but
damage already split is not reassigned to the subject.

If you and the subject of the spell move out of range of each other, the
spell ends.

*Focus:* A pair of platinum rings (worth at least 50 gp each) worn by
both you and the warded creature.

Shillelagh

Transmutation

**Level:** Drd 1

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** One touched nonmagical oak club or quarterstaff

**Duration:** 1 min./level

**Saving Throw:** Will negates (object)

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (object)

Your own nonmagical club or quarterstaff becomes a weapon with a +1
enhancement bonus on attack and damage rolls. (A quarterstaff gains this
enhancement for both ends of the weapon.) It deals damage as if it were
two size categories larger (a Small club or quarterstaff so transmuted
deals 1d8 points of damage, a Medium 2d6, and a Large 3d6), +1 for its
enhancement bonus. These effects only occur when the weapon is wielded
by you. If you do not wield it, the weapon behaves as if unaffected by
this spell.

Shocking Grasp

Evocation \[Electricity\]

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 1

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Creature or object touched

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

Your successful melee touch attack deals 1d6 points of electricity
damage per caster level (maximum 5d6). When delivering the jolt, you
gain a +3 bonus on attack rolls if the opponent is wearing metal armor
(or made out of metal, carrying a lot of metal, or the like).

Shout

Evocation \[Sonic\]

**Level:** Brd 4, Sor/Wiz 4

**Components:** V

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** 30 ft.

**Area:** Cone-shaped burst

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** Fortitude partial or Reflex negates (object); see text

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (object)

You emit an ear-splitting yell that deafens and damages creatures in its
path. Any creature within the area is deafened for 2d6 rounds and takes
5d6 points of sonic damage. A successful save negates the deafness and
reduces the damage by half. Any exposed brittle or crystalline object or
crystalline creature takes 1d6 points of sonic damage per caster level
(maximum 15d6). An affected creature is allowed a Fortitude save to
reduce the damage by half, and a creature holding fragile objects can
negate damage to them with a successful Reflex save.

A *shout* spell cannot penetrate a *silence* spell.

Shout, Greater

Evocation \[Sonic\]

**Level:** Brd 6, Sor/Wiz 8

**Components:** V, S, F

**Range:** 60 ft.

**Saving Throw:** Fortitude partial or Reflex negates (object); see text

This spell functions like *shout,* except that the cone deals 10d6
points of sonic damage (or 1d6 points of sonic damage per caster level,
maximum 20d6, against exposed brittle or crystalline objects or
crystalline creatures). It also causes creatures to be stunned for 1
round and deafened for 4d6 rounds. A creature in the area of the cone
can negate the stunning and halve both the damage and the duration of
the deafness with a successful Fortitude save. A creature holding
vulnerable objects can attempt a Reflex save to negate the damage to
those objects.

*Arcane Focus:* A small metal or ivory horn.

Shrink Item

Transmutation

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 3

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** One touched object of up to 2 cu. ft./level

**Duration:** One day/level; see text

**Saving Throw:** Will negates (object)

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (object)

You are able to shrink one nonmagical item (if it is within the size
limit) to 1/16 of its normal size in each dimension (to about 1/4,000
the original volume and mass). This change effectively reduces the
object’s size by four categories. Optionally, you can also change its
now shrunken composition to a clothlike one. Objects changed by a
*shrink item* spell can be returned to normal composition and size
merely by tossing them onto any solid surface or by a word of command
from the original caster. Even a burning fire and its fuel can be shrunk
by this spell. Restoring the shrunken object to its normal size and
composition ends the spell.

*Shrink item* can be made permanent with a *permanency* spell, in which
case the affected object can be shrunk and expanded an indefinite number
of times, but only by the original caster.

Silence

Illusion (Glamer)

**Level:** Brd 2, Clr 2

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level)

**Area:** 20-ft.-radius emanation centered on a creature, object, or
point in space

**Duration:** 1 min./level (D)

**Saving Throw:** Will negates; see text or none (object)

**Spell Resistance:** Yes; see text or no (object)

Upon the casting of this spell, complete silence prevails in the
affected area. All sound is stopped: Conversation is impossible, spells
with verbal components cannot be cast, and no noise whatsoever issues
from, enters, or passes through the area. The spell can be cast on a
point in space, but the effect is stationary unless cast on a mobile
object. The spell can be centered on a creature, and the effect then
radiates from the creature and moves as it moves. An unwilling creature
can attempt a Will save to negate the spell and can use spell
resistance, if any. Items in a creature’s possession or magic items that
emit sound receive the benefits of saves and spell resistance, but
unattended objects and points in space do not. This spell provides a
defense against sonic or language-based attacks.

Silent Image

Illusion (Figment)

**Level:** Brd 1, Sor/Wiz 1

**Components:** V, S, F

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level)

**Effect:** Visual figment that cannot extend beyond four 10-ft. cubes +
one 10-ft. cube/level (S)

**Duration:** Concentration

**Saving Throw:** Will disbelief (if interacted with)

**Spell Resistance:** No

This spell creates the visual illusion of an object, creature, or force,
as visualized by you. The illusion does not create sound, smell,
texture, or temperature. You can move the image within the limits of the
size of the effect.

*Focus:* A bit of fleece.

Simulacrum

Illusion (Shadow)

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 7

**Components:** V, S, M, XP

**Casting Time:** 12 hours

**Range:** 0 ft.

**Effect:** One duplicate creature

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

*Simulacrum* creates an illusory duplicate of any creature. The
duplicate creature is partially real and formed from ice or snow. It
appears to be the same as the original, but it has only one-half of the
real creature’s levels or Hit Dice (and the appropriate hit points,
feats, skill ranks, and special abilities for a creature of that level
or HD). You can’t create a simulacrum of a creature whose Hit Dice or
levels exceed twice your caster level. You must make a Disguise check
when you cast the spell to determine how good the likeness is. A
creature familiar with the original might detect the ruse with a
successful Spot check (opposed by the caster’s Disguise check) or a DC
20 Sense Motive check.

At all times the simulacrum remains under your absolute command. No
special telepathic link exists, so command must be exercised in some
other manner. A simulacrum has no ability to become more powerful. It
cannot increase its level or abilities. If reduced to 0 hit points or
otherwise destroyed, it reverts to snow and melts instantly into
nothingness. A complex process requiring at least 24 hours, 100 gp per
hit point, and a fully equipped magical laboratory can repair damage to
a simulacrum.

*Material Component:* The spell is cast over the rough snow or ice form,
and some piece of the creature to be duplicated (hair, nail, or the
like) must be placed inside the snow or ice. Additionally, the spell
requires powdered ruby worth 100 gp per HD of the simulacrum to be
created.

*XP Cost:* 100 XP per HD of the simulacrum to be created (minimum 1,000
XP).

Slay Living

Necromancy \[Death\]

**Level:** Clr 5, Death 5

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Living creature touched

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** Fortitude partial

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

You can slay any one living creature. You must succeed on a melee touch
attack to touch the subject, and it can avoid death with a successful
Fortitude save. If it succeeds, it instead takes 3d6 points of damage +1
point per caster level.

Sleep

Enchantment (Compulsion) \[Mind-Affecting\]

**Level:** Brd 1, Sor/Wiz 1

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 1 round

**Range:** Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Area:** One or more living creatures within a 10-ft.-radius burst

**Duration:** 1 min./level

**Saving Throw:** Will negates

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

A *sleep* spell causes a magical slumber to come upon 4 Hit Dice of
creatures. Creatures with the fewest HD are affected first.

Among creatures with equal HD, those who are closest to the spell’s
point of origin are affected first. Hit Dice that are not sufficient to
affect a creature are wasted.

Sleeping creatures are helpless. Slapping or wounding awakens an
affected creature, but normal noise does not. Awakening a creature is a
standard action (an application of the aid another action).

*Sleep* does not target unconscious creatures, constructs, or undead
creatures.

*Material Component:* A pinch of fine sand, rose petals, or a live
cricket.

Sleet Storm

Conjuration (Creation) \[Cold\]

**Level:** Drd 3, Sor/Wiz 3

**Components:** V, S, M/DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level)

**Area:** Cylinder (40-ft. radius, 20 ft. high)

**Duration:** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

Driving sleet blocks all sight (even darkvision) within it and causes
the ground in the area to be icy. A creature can walk within or through
the area of sleet at half normal speed with a DC 10 Balance check.
Failure means it can’t move in that round, while failure by 5 or more
means it falls (see the Balance skill for details).

The sleet extinguishes torches and small fires.

*Arcane Material Component:* A pinch of dust and a few drops of water.

Slow

Transmutation

**Level:** Brd 3, Sor/Wiz 3

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Targets:** One creature/level, no two of which can be more than 30 ft.
apart

**Duration:** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw:** Will negates

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

An affected creature moves and attacks at a drastically slowed rate. A
*slowed* creature can take only a single move action or standard action
each turn, but not both (nor may it take full-round actions).
Additionally, it takes a –1 penalty on attack rolls, AC, and Reflex
saves. A *slowed* creature moves at half its normal speed (round down to
the next 5-foot increment), which affects the creature’s jumping
distance as normal for decreased speed.

Multiple *slow* effects don’t stack. *Slow* counters and dispels
*haste*.

*Material Component:* A drop of molasses.

Snare

Transmutation

**Level:** Rgr 2, Drd 3

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 3 rounds

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Touched nonmagical circle of vine, rope, or thong with a 2
ft. diameter + 2 ft./level

**Duration:** Until triggered or broken

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

This spell enables you to make a snare that functions as a magic trap.
The snare can be made from any supple vine, a thong, or a rope. When you
cast *snare* upon it, the cordlike object blends with its surroundings
(Search DC 23 for a character with the trapfinding ability to locate).
One end of the snare is tied in a loop that contracts around one or more
of the limbs of any creature stepping inside the circle.

If a strong and supple tree is nearby, the snare can be fastened to it.
The spell causes the tree to bend and then straighten when the loop is
triggered, dealing 1d6 points of damage to the creature trapped and
lifting it off the ground by the trapped limb or limbs. If no such tree
is available, the cordlike object tightens around the creature, dealing
no damage but causing it to be entangled.

The snare is magical. To escape, a trapped creature must make a DC 23
Escape Artist check or a DC 23 Strength check that is a full-round
action. The snare has AC 7 and 5 hit points. A successful escape from
the snare breaks the loop and ends the spell.

Soften Earth and Stone

Transmutation \[Earth\]

**Level:** Drd 2, Earth 2

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Area:** 10-ft. square/level; see text

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

When this spell is cast, all natural, undressed earth or stone in the
spell’s area is softened. Wet earth becomes thick mud, dry earth becomes
loose sand or dirt, and stone becomes soft clay that is easily molded or
chopped. You affect a 10-footsquare area to a depth of 1 to 4 feet,
depending on the toughness or resilience of the ground at that spot.
Magical, enchanted, dressed, or worked stone cannot be affected. Earth
or stone creatures are not affected.

A creature in mud must succeed on a Reflex save or be caught for 1d2
rounds and unable to move, attack, or cast spells. A creature that
succeeds on its save can move through the mud at half speed, and it
can’t run or charge.

Loose dirt is not as troublesome as mud, but all creatures in the area
can move at only half their normal speed and can’t run or charge over
the surface.

Stone softened into clay does not hinder movement, but it does allow
characters to cut, shape, or excavate areas they may not have been able
to affect before.

While *soften earth and stone* does not affect dressed or worked stone,
cavern ceilings or vertical surfaces such as cliff faces can be
affected. Usually, this causes a moderate collapse or landslide as the
loosened material peels away from the face of the wall or roof and
falls.

A moderate amount of structural damage can be dealt to a manufactured
structure by softening the ground beneath it, causing it to settle.
However, most well-built structures will only be damaged by this spell,
not destroyed.

Solid Fog

Conjuration (Creation)

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 4

**Components:** V, S, M

**Duration:** 1 min./level

**Spell Resistance:** No

This spell functions like *fog cloud*, but in addition to obscuring
sight, the *solid fog* is so thick that any creature attempting to move
through it progresses at a speed of 5 feet, regardless of its normal
speed, and it takes a –2 penalty on all melee attack and melee damage
rolls. The vapors prevent effective ranged weapon attacks (except for
magic rays and the like). A creature or object that falls into *solid
fog* is slowed, so that each 10 feet of vapor that it passes through
reduces falling damage by 1d6. A creature can’t take a 5-foot step while
in *solid fog.*

However, unlike normal fog, only a severe wind (31+ mph) disperses these
vapors, and it does so in 1 round.

*Solid fog* can be made permanent with a *permanency* spell. A permanent
*solid fog* dispersed by wind reforms in 10 minutes.

*Material Component:* A pinch of dried, powdered peas combined with
powdered animal hoof.

Song of Discord

Enchantment (Compulsion) \[Mind-Affecting, Sonic\]

**Level:** Brd 5

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Area:** Creatures within a 20-ft.-radius spread

**Duration:** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw:** Will negates

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

This spell causes those within the area to turn on each other rather
than attack their foes. Each affected creature has a 50% chance to
attack the nearest target each round. (Roll to determine each creature’s
behavior every round at the beginning of its turn.) A creature that does
not attack its nearest neighbor is free to act normally for that round.

Creatures forced by a *song of discord* to attack their fellows employ
all methods at their disposal, choosing their deadliest spells and most
advantageous combat tactics. They do not, however, harm targets that
have fallen unconscious.

Soul Bind

Necromancy

**Level:** Clr 9, Sor/Wiz 9

**Components:** V, S, F

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target:** Corpse

**Duration:** Permanent

**Saving Throw:** Will negates

**Spell Resistance:** No

You draw the soul from a newly dead body and imprison it in a black
sapphire gem. The subject must have been dead no more than 1 round per
caster level. The soul, once trapped in the gem, cannot be returned
through *clone, raise dead, reincarnation, resurrection, true
resurrection,* or even a *miracle* or a *wish.* Only by destroying the
gem or dispelling the spell on the gem can one free the soul (which is
then still dead).

*Focus:* A black sapphire of at least 1,000 gp value for every Hit Die
possessed by the creature whose soul is to be bound. If the gem is not
valuable enough, it shatters when the binding is attempted. (While
creatures have no concept of level or Hit Dice as such, the value of the
gem needed to trap an individual can be researched. Remember that this
value can change over time as creatures gain more Hit Dice.)

Sound Burst

Evocation \[Sonic\]

**Level:** Brd 2, Clr 2

**Components:** V, S, F/DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Area:** 10-ft.-radius spread

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** Fortitude partial

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

You blast an area with a tremendous cacophony. Every creature in the
area takes 1d8 points of sonic damage and must succeed on a Fortitude
save to avoid being stunned for 1 round.

Creatures that cannot hear are not stunned but are still damaged.

*Arcane Focus:* A musical instrument.

Speak with Animals

Divination

**Level:** Brd 3, Drd 1, Rgr 1

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Personal

**Target:** You

**Duration:** 1 min./level

You can comprehend and communicate with animals. You are able to ask
questions of and receive answers from animals, although the spell
doesn’t make them any more friendly or cooperative than normal.
Furthermore, wary and cunning animals are likely to be terse and
evasive, while the more stupid ones make inane comments. If an animal is
friendly toward you, it may do some favor or service for you.

Speak with Dead

Necromancy \[Language-Dependent\]

**Level:** Clr 3

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 10 minutes

**Range:** 10 ft.

**Target:** One dead creature

**Duration:** 1 min./level

**Saving Throw:** Will negates; see text

**Spell Resistance:** No

You grant the semblance of life and intellect to a corpse, allowing it
to answer several questions that you put to it. You may ask one question
per two caster levels. Unasked questions are wasted if the duration
expires. The corpse’s knowledge is limited to what the creature knew
during life, including the languages it spoke (if any). Answers are
usually brief, cryptic, or repetitive. If the creature’s alignment was
different from yours, the corpse gets a Will save to resist the spell as
if it were alive.

If the corpse has been subject to *speak with dead* within the past
week, the new spell fails. You can cast this spell on a corpse that has
been deceased for any amount of time, but the body must be mostly intact
to be able to respond. A damaged corpse may be able to give partial
answers or partially correct answers, but it must at least have a mouth
in order to speak at all.

This spell does not let you actually speak to the person (whose soul has
departed). It instead draws on the imprinted knowledge stored in the
corpse. The partially animated body retains the imprint of the soul that
once inhabited it, and thus it can speak with all the knowledge that the
creature had while alive. The corpse, however, cannot learn new
information.

Indeed, it can’t even remember being questioned.

This spell does not affect a corpse that has been turned into an undead
creature.

Speak with Plants

Divination

**Level:** Brd 4, Drd 3, Rgr 2

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Personal

**Target:** You

**Duration:** 1 min./level

You can comprehend and communicate with plants, including both normal
plants and plant creatures. You are able to ask questions of and receive
answers from plants. A regular plant’s sense of its surroundings is
limited, so it won’t be able to give (or recognize) detailed
descriptions of creatures or answer questions about events outside its
immediate vicinity.

The spell doesn’t make plant creatures any more friendly or cooperative
than normal. Furthermore, wary and cunning plant creatures are likely to
be terse and evasive, while the more stupid ones may make inane
comments. If a plant creature is friendly toward you, it may do some
favor or service for you.

Spectral Hand

Necromancy

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 2

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Effect:** One spectral hand

**Duration:** 1 min./level (D)

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

A ghostly, glowing hand shaped from your life force materializes and
moves as you desire, allowing you to deliver low-level, touch range
spells at a distance. On casting the spell, you lose 1d4 hit points that
return when the spell ends (even if it is dispelled), but not if the
hand is destroyed. (The hit points can be healed as normal.) For as long
as the spell lasts, any touch range spell of 4th level or lower that you
cast can be delivered by the *spectral hand*. The spell gives you a +2
bonus on your melee touch attack roll, and attacking with the hand
counts normally as an attack. The hand always strikes from your
direction. The hand cannot flank targets like a creature can. After it
delivers a spell, or if the hand goes beyond the spell range, goes out
of your sight, the hand returns to you and hovers.

The hand is incorporeal and thus cannot be harmed by normal weapons. It
has improved evasion (half damage on a failed Reflex save and no damage
on a successful save), your save bonuses, and an AC of at least 22. Your
Intelligence modifier applies to the hand’s AC as if it were the hand’s
Dexterity modifier. The hand has 1 to 4 hit points, the same number that
you lost in creating it.

Spell Immunity

Abjuration

**Level:** Clr 4, Protection 4, Strength 4

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Creature touched

**Duration:** 10 min./level

**Saving Throw:** Will negates (harmless)

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (harmless)

The warded creature is immune to the effects of one specified spell for
every four levels you have. The spells must be of 4th level or lower.
The warded creature effectively has unbeatable spell resistance
regarding the specified spell or spells. Naturally, that immunity
doesn’t protect a creature from spells for which spell resistance
doesn’t apply. *Spell immunity* protects against spells, spell-like
effects of magic items, and innate spell-like abilities of creatures. It
does not protect against supernatural or extraordinary abilities, such
as breath weapons or gaze attacks.

Only a particular spell can be protected against, not a certain domain
or school of spells or a group of spells that are similar in effect.

A creature can have only one *spell immunity* or *greater spell
immunity* spell in effect on it at a time.

Spell Immunity, Greater

Abjuration

**Level:** Clr 8

This spell functions like *spell immunity*, except the immunity applies
to spells of 8th level or lower.

A creature can have only one *spell immunity* or *greater spell
immunity* spell in effect on it at a time.

Spell Resistance

Abjuration

**Level:** Clr 5, Magic 5, Protection 5

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Creature touched

**Duration:** 1 min./level

**Saving Throw:** Will negates (harmless)

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (harmless)

The creature gains spell resistance equal to 12 + your caster level.

Spellstaff

Transmutation

**Level:** Drd 6

**Components:** V, S, F

**Casting Time:** 10 minutes

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Wooden quarterstaff touched

**Duration:** Permanent until discharged (D)

**Saving Throw:** Will negates (object)

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (object)

You store one spell that you can normally cast in a wooden quarterstaff.
Only one such spell can be stored in a staff at a given time, and you
cannot have more than one *spellstaff* at any given time. You can cast a
spell stored within a staff just as though it were among those you had
prepared, but it does not count against your normal allotment for a
given day. You use up any applicable material components required to
cast the spell when you store it in the *spellstaff.*

*Focus:* The staff that stores the spell.

Spell Turning

Abjuration

**Level:** Luck 7, Magic 7, Sor/Wiz 7

**Components:** V, S, M/DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Personal

**Target:** You

**Duration:** Until expended or 10 min./level

Spells and spell-like effects targeted on you are turned back upon the
original caster. The abjuration turns only spells that have you as a
target. Effect and area spells are not affected. *Spell turning* also
fails to stop touch range spells.

From seven to ten (1d4+6) spell levels are affected by the turning. The
exact number is rolled secretly.

When you are targeted by a spell of higher level than the amount of
spell turning you have left, that spell is partially turned. The
subtract the amount of spell turning left from the spell level of the
incoming spell, then divide the result by the spell level of the
incoming spell to see what fraction of the effect gets through. For
damaging spells, you and the caster each take a fraction of the damage.
For nondamaging spells, each of you has a proportional chance to be
affected.

If you and a spellcasting attacker are both warded by *spell turning*
effects in operation, a resonating field is created.

Roll randomly to determine the result.

<table>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>d%</strong></td>
<td><strong>Effect</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>01–70</td>
<td>Spell drains away without effect.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>71–80</td>
<td>Spell affects both of you equally at full effect.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>81–97</td>
<td>Both turning effects are rendered nonfunctional for 1d4 minutes.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>98–100</td>
<td>Both of you go through a rift into another plane.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

*Arcane Material Component:* A small silver mirror.

Spider Climb

Transmutation

**Level:** Drd 2, Sor/Wiz 2

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Creature touched

**Duration:** 10 min./level

**Saving Throw:** Will negates (harmless)

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (harmless)

The subject can climb and travel on vertical surfaces or even traverse
ceilings as well as a spider does. The affected creature must have its
hands free to climb in this manner. The subject gains a climb speed of
20 feet; furthermore, it need not make Climb checks to traverse a
vertical or horizontal surface (even upside down). A *spider climbing*
creature retains its Dexterity bonus to Armor Class (if any) while
climbing, and opponents get no special bonus to their attacks against
it. It cannot, however, use the run action while climbing.

*Material Component:* A drop of bitumen and a live spider, both of which
must be eaten by the subject.

Spike Growth

Transmutation

**Level:** Drd 3, Rgr 2

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Area:** One 20-ft. square/level

**Duration:** 1 hour/level (D)

**Saving Throw:** Reflex partial

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

Any ground-covering vegetation in the spell’s area becomes very hard and
sharply pointed without changing its appearance.

In areas of bare earth, roots and rootlets act in the same way.
Typically, *spike growth* can be cast in any outdoor setting except open
water, ice, heavy snow, sandy desert, or bare stone. Any creature moving
on foot into or through the spell’s area takes 1d4 points of piercing
damage for each 5 feet of movement through the spiked area.

Any creature that takes damage from this spell must also succeed on a
Reflex save or suffer injuries to its feet and legs that slow its land
speed by one-half. This speed penalty lasts for 24 hours or until the
injured creature receives a *cure* spell (which also restores lost hit
points). Another character can remove the penalty by taking 10 minutes
to dress the injuries and succeeding on a Heal check against the spell’s
save DC.

*Spike growth* can’t be disabled with the Disable Device skill.

*Note:* Magic traps such as *spike growth* are hard to detect. A rogue
(only) can use the Search skill to find a *spike growth*. The DC is 25 +
spell level, or DC 28 for *spike growth* (or DC 27 for *spike growth*
cast by a ranger).

Spike Stones

Transmutation \[Earth\]

**Level:** Drd 4, Earth 4

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Area:** One 20-ft. square/level

**Duration:** 1 hour/level (D)

**Saving Throw:** Reflex partial

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

Rocky ground, stone floors, and similar surfaces shape themselves into
long, sharp points that blend into the background.

*Spike stones* impede progress through an area and deal damage. Any
creature moving on foot into or through the spell’s area moves at half
speed.

In addition, each creature moving through the area takes 1d8 points of
piercing damage for each 5 feet of movement through the spiked area.

Any creature that takes damage from this spell must also succeed on a
Reflex save to avoid injuries to its feet and legs. A failed save causes
the creature’s speed to be reduced to half normal for 24 hours or until
the injured creature receives a *cure* spell (which also restores lost
hit points). Another character can remove the penalty by taking 10
minutes to dress the injuries and succeeding on a Heal check against the
spell’s save DC.

*Spike stones* is a magic trap that can’t be disabled with the Disable
Device skill.

*Note:* Magic traps such as *spike stones* are hard to detect. A rogue
(only) can use the Search skill to find *spike stones*. The DC is 25 +
spell level, or DC 29 for *spike stones*.

Spiritual Weapon

Evocation \[Force\]

**Level:** Clr 2, War 2

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Effect:** Magic weapon of force

**Duration:** 1 round/level (D)

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

A weapon made of pure force springs into existence and attacks opponents
at a distance, as you direct it, dealing 1d8 force damage per hit, +1
point per three caster levels (maximum +5 at 15th level). The weapon
takes the shape of a weapon favored by your deity or a weapon with some
spiritual significance or symbolism to you (see below) and has the same
threat range and critical multipliers as a real weapon of its form. It
strikes the opponent you designate, starting with one attack in the
round the spell is cast and continuing each round thereafter on your
turn. It uses your base attack bonus (possibly allowing it multiple
attacks per round in subsequent rounds) plus your Wisdom modifier as its
attack bonus. It strikes as a spell, not as a weapon, so, for example,
it can damage creatures that have damage reduction. As a force effect,
it can strike incorporeal creatures without the normal miss chance
associated with incorporeality. The weapon always strikes from your
direction. It does not get a flanking bonus or help a combatant get one.
Your feats or combat actions do not affect the weapon. If the weapon
goes beyond the spell range, if it goes out of your sight, or if you are
not directing it, the weapon returns to you and hovers.

Each round after the first, you can use a move action to redirect the
weapon to a new target. If you do not, the weapon continues to attack
the previous round’s target. On any round that the weapon switches
targets, it gets one attack. Subsequent rounds of attacking that target
allow the weapon to make multiple attacks if your base attack bonus
would allow it to. Even if the *spiritual weapon* is a ranged weapon,
use the spell’s range, not the weapon’s normal range increment, and
switching targets still is a move action.

A *spiritual weapon* cannot be attacked or harmed by physical attacks,
but *dispel magic*, *disintegrate*, a *sphere of annihilation*, or a
*rod of cancellation* affects it. A *spiritual weapon*’s AC against
touch attacks is 12 (10 + size bonus for Tiny object).

If an attacked creature has spell resistance, you make a caster level
check (1d20 + caster level) against that spell resistance the first time
the *spiritual weapon* strikes it. If the weapon is successfully
resisted, the spell is dispelled. If not, the weapon has its normal full
effect on that creature for the duration of the spell.

The weapon that you get is often a force replica of your deity’s own
personal weapon. A cleric without a deity gets a weapon based on his
alignment. A neutral cleric without a deity can create a *spiritual
weapon* of any alignment, provided he is acting at least generally in
accord with that alignment at the time. The weapons associated with each
alignment are as follows.

*Chaos:* Battleaxe

*Evil:* Light flail

*Good:* Warhammer

*Law:* Longsword,

Statue

Transmutation

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 7

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 1 round

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Creature touched

**Duration:** 1 hour/level (D)

**Saving Throw:** Will negates (harmless)

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (harmless)

A *statue* spell turns the subject to solid stone, along with any
garments and equipment worn or carried. In statue form, the subject
gains hardness 8. The subject retains its own hit points.

The subject can see, hear, and smell normally, but it does not need to
eat or breathe. Feeling is limited to those sensations that can affect
the granite-hard substance of the individual’s body. Chipping is equal
to a mere scratch, but breaking off one of the statue’s arms constitutes
serious damage.

The subject of a *statue* spell can return to its normal state, act, and
then return instantly to the statue state (a free action) if it so
desires, as long as the spell duration is in effect.

*Material Component:* Lime, sand, and a drop of water stirred by an iron
bar, such as a nail or spike.

Status

Divination

**Level:** Clr 2

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Targets:** One living creature touched per three levels

**Duration:** 1 hour/level

**Saving Throw:** Will negates (harmless)

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (harmless)

When you need to keep track of comrades who may get separated, *status*
allows you to mentally monitor their relative positions and general
condition. You are aware of direction and distance to the creatures and
any conditions affecting them: unharmed, wounded, disabled, staggered,
unconscious, dying, nauseated, panicked, stunned, poisoned, diseased,
*confused,* or the like. Once the spell has been cast upon the subjects,
the distance between them and the caster does not affect the spell as
long as they are on the same plane of existence. If a subject leaves the
plane, or if it dies, the spell ceases to function for it.

Stinking Cloud

Conjuration (Creation)

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 3

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Effect:** Cloud spreads in 20-ft. radius, 20 ft. high

**Duration:** 1 round/level

**Saving Throw:** Fortitude negates; see text

**Spell Resistance:** No

*Stinking cloud* creates a bank of fog like that created by *fog cloud*,
except that the vapors are nauseating. Living creatures in the cloud
become nauseated. This condition lasts as long as the creature is in the
cloud and for 1d4+1 rounds after it leaves. (Roll separately for each
nauseated character.) Any creature that succeeds on its save but remains
in the cloud must continue to save each round on your turn.

*Stinking cloud* can be made permanent with a *permanency* spell. A
permanent *stinking cloud* dispersed by wind reforms in 10 minutes.

*Material Component:* A rotten egg or several skunk cabbage leaves.

Stone Shape

Transmutation \[Earth\]

**Level:** Clr 3, Drd 3, Earth 3, Sor/Wiz 4

**Components:** V, S, M/DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Stone or stone object touched, up to 10 cu. ft. + 1 cu.
ft./level

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

You can form an existing piece of stone into any shape that suits your
purpose. While it’s possible to make crude coffers, doors, and so forth
with *stone shape,* fine detail isn’t possible. There is a 30% chance
that any shape including moving parts simply doesn’t work.

*Arcane Material Component:* Soft clay, which must be worked into
roughly the desired shape of the stone object and then touched to the
stone while the verbal component is uttered.

Stoneskin

Abjuration

**Level:** Drd 5, Earth 6, Sor/Wiz 4, Strength 6

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** Creature touched

**Duration:** 10 min./level or until discharged

**Saving Throw:** Will negates (harmless)

**Spell Resistance:** Yes (harmless)

The warded creature gains resistance to blows, cuts, stabs, and slashes.
The subject gains damage reduction 10/adamantine. (It ignores the first
10 points of damage each time it takes damage from a weapon, though an
adamantine weapon bypasses the reduction.) Once the spell has prevented
a total of 10 points of damage per caster level (maximum 150 points), it
is discharged.

*Material Component:* Granite and 250 gp worth of diamond dust sprinkled
on the target’s skin.

Stone Tell

Divination

**Level:** Drd 6

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 10 minutes

**Range:** Personal

**Target:** You

**Duration:** 1 min./level

You gain the ability to speak with stones, which relate to you who or
what has touched them as well as revealing what is covered or concealed
behind or under them. The stones relate complete descriptions if asked.
A stone’s perspective, perception, and knowledge may prevent the stone
from providing the details you are looking for.

You can speak with natural or worked stone.

Stone to Flesh

Transmutation

**Level:** Sor/Wiz 6

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Target:** One petrified creature or a cylinder of stone from 1 ft. to
3 ft. in diameter and up to 10 ft. long

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** Fortitude negates (object); see text

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

This spell restores a petrified creature to its normal state, restoring
life and goods. The creature must make a DC 15 Fortitude save to survive
the process. Any petrified creature, regardless of size, can be
restored.

The spell also can convert a mass of stone into a fleshy substance. Such
flesh is inert and lacking a vital life force unless a life force or
magical energy is available. (For example, this spell would turn a stone
golem into a flesh golem, but an ordinary statue would become a corpse.)
You can affect an object that fits within a cylinder from 1 foot to 3
feet in diameter and up to 10 feet long or a cylinder of up to those
dimensions in a larger mass of stone.

*Material Component:* A pinch of earth and a drop of blood.

Storm of Vengeance

Conjuration (Summoning)

**Level:** Drd 9, Clr 9

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 round

**Range:** Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level)

**Effect:** 360-ft.-radius storm cloud

**Duration:** Concentration (maximum 10 rounds) (D)

**Saving Throw:** See text

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

This spell creates an enormous black storm cloud. Lightning and crashing
claps of thunder appear within the storm. Each creature beneath the
cloud must succeed on a Fortitude save or be deafened for 1d4x10
minutes.

If you do not maintain concentration on the spell after casting it, the
spell ends. If you continue to concentrate, the spell generates
additional effects in each following round, as noted below. Each effect
occurs during your turn.

*2nd Round:* Acid rains down in the area, dealing 1d6 points of acid
damage (no save).

*3rd Round:* You call six bolts of lightning down from the cloud. You
decide where the bolts strike. No two bolts may be directed at the same
target. Each bolt deals 10d6 points of electricity damage. A creature
struck can attempt a Reflex save for half damage.

*4th Round:* Hailstones rain down in the area, dealing 5d6 points of
bludgeoning damage (no save).

*5th through 10th Rounds:* Violent rain and wind gusts reduce
visibility. The rain obscures all sight, including darkvision, beyond 5
feet. A creature 5 feet away has concealment (attacks have a 20% miss
chance). Creatures farther away have total concealment (50% miss chance,
and the attacker cannot use sight to locate the target). Speed is
reduced by three-quarters.

Ranged attacks within the area of the storm are impossible. Spells cast
within the area are disrupted unless the caster succeeds on a
Concentration check against a DC equal to the *storm of vengeance*’s
save DC + the level of the spell the caster is trying to cast.

Suggestion

Enchantment (Compulsion) \[Language-Dependent, Mind-Affecting\]

**Level:** Brd 2, Sor/Wiz 3

**Components:** V, M

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target:** One living creature

**Duration:** 1 hour/level or until completed

**Saving Throw:** Will negates

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

You influence the actions of the target creature by suggesting a course
of activity (limited to a sentence or two). The *suggestion* must be
worded in such a manner as to make the activity sound reasonable. Asking
the creature to do some obviously harmful act automatically negates the
effect of the spell.

The suggested course of activity can continue for the entire duration.
If the suggested activity can be completed in a shorter time, the spell
ends when the subject finishes what it was asked to do. You can instead
specify conditions that will trigger a special activity during the
duration. If the condition is not met before the spell duration expires,
the activity is not performed.

A very reasonable *suggestion* causes the save to be made with a penalty
(such as –1 or –2).

*Material Component:* A snake’s tongue and either a bit of honeycomb or
a drop of sweet oil.

Suggestion, Mass

Enchantment (Compulsion) \[Language-Dependent, Mind-Affecting\]

**Level:** Brd 5, Sor/Wiz 6

**Range:** Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Targets:** One creature/level, no two of which can be more than 30 ft.
apart

This spell functions like *suggestion*, except that it can affect more
creatures. The same *suggestion* applies to all these creatures.

Summon Instrument

Conjuration (Summoning)

**Level:** Brd 0

**Components:** V, S

**Casting Time:** 1 round

**Range:** 0 ft.

**Effect:** One summoned handheld musical instrument

**Duration:** 1 min./level (D)

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

This spell summons one handheld musical instrument of your choice. This
instrument appears in your hands or at your feet (your choice). The
instrument is typical for its type. Only one instrument appears per
casting, and it will play only for you. You can’t summon an instrument
too large to be held in two hands.

Summon Monster I

Conjuration (Summoning) \[see text\]

**Level:** Brd 1, Clr 1, Sor/Wiz 1

**Components:** V, S, F/DF

**Casting Time:** 1 round

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Effect:** One summoned creature

**Duration:** 1 round/level (D)

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

This spell summons an extraplanar creature (typically an outsider,
elemental, or magical beast native to another plane). It appears where
you designate and acts immediately, on your turn. It attacks your
opponents to the best of its ability. If you can communicate with the
creature, you can direct it not to attack, to attack particular enemies,
or to perform other actions.

The spell conjures one of the creatures from the 1st-level list on the
accompanying Summon Monster table. You choose which kind of creature to
summon, and you can change that choice each time you cast the spell.

A summoned monster cannot summon or otherwise conjure another creature,
nor can it use any teleportation or planar travel abilities. Creatures
cannot be summoned into an environment that cannot support them.

When you use a summoning spell to summon an air, chaotic, earth, evil,
fire, good, lawful, or water creature, it is a spell of that type.

*Arcane Focus:* A tiny bag and a small (not necessarily lit) candle.

Summon Monster II

Conjuration (Summoning) \[see text for *summon monster I*\]

**Level:** Brd 2, Clr 2, Sor/Wiz 2

**Effect:** One or more summoned creatures, no two of which can be more
than 30 ft. apart

This spell functions like *summon monster I,* except that you can summon
one creature from the 2nd-level list or 1d3 creatures of the same kind
from the 1st-level list.

Summon Monster III

Conjuration (Summoning) \[see text for *summon monster I*\]

**Level:** Brd 3, Clr 3, Sor/Wiz 3

**Effect:** One or more summoned creatures, no two of which can be more
than 30 ft. apart

This spell functions like *summon monster I,* except that you can summon
one creature from the 3rd-level list, 1d3 creatures of the same kind
from the 2nd-level list, or 1d4+1 creatures of the same kind from the
1st-level list.

Summon Monster IV

Conjuration (Summoning) \[see text for *summon monster I*\]

**Level:** Brd 4, Clr 4, Sor/Wiz 4

**Effect:** One or more summoned creatures, no two of which can be more
than 30 ft. apart

This spell functions like *summon monster I,* except that you can summon
one creature from the 4th-level list, 1d3 creatures of the same kind
from the 3rd-level list, or 1d4+1 creatures of the same kind from a
lower-level list.

Summon Monster V

Conjuration (Summoning) \[see text for *summon monster I*\]

**Level:** Brd 5, Clr 5, Sor/Wiz 5

**Effect:** One or more summoned creatures, no two of which can be more
than 30 ft. apart

This spell functions like *summon monster I,* except that you can summon
one creature from the 5th-level list, 1d3 creatures of the same kind
from the 4th-level list, or 1d4+1 creatures of the same kind from a
lower-level list.

Summon Monster VI

Conjuration (Summoning) \[see text for *summon monster I*\]

**Level:** Brd 6, Clr 6, Sor/Wiz 6

**Effect:** One or more summoned creatures, no two of which can be more
than 30 ft. apart

This spell functions like *summon monster I,* except you can summon one
creature from the 6th-level list, 1d3 creatures of the same kind from
the 5th-level list, or 1d4+1 creatures of the same kind from a
lower-level list.

Summon Monster VII

Conjuration (Summoning) \[see text for *summon monster I*\]

**Level:** Clr 7, Sor/Wiz 7

This spell functions like *summon monster I,* except that you can summon
one creature from the 7th-level list, 1d3 creatures of the same kind
from the 6th-level list, or 1d4+1 creatures of the same kind from a
lower-level list.

Summon Monster VIII

Conjuration (Summoning) \[see text for *summon monster I*\]

**Level:** Clr 8, Sor/Wiz 8

This spell functions like *summon monster I,* except that you can summon
one creature from the 8th-level list, 1d3 creatures of the same kind
from the 7th-level list, or 1d4+1 creatures of the same kind from a
lower-level list.

Summon Monster IX

Conjuration (Summoning) \[see text for *summon monster I*\]

**Level:** Chaos 9, Clr 9, Evil 9, Good 9, Law 9, Sor/Wiz 9

This spell functions like *summon monster I,* except that you can summon
one creature from the 9th-level list, 1d3 creatures of the same kind
from the 8th-level list, or 1d4+1 creatures of the same kind from a
lower-level list.

<table>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>Summon Monster</strong></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>1st Level</strong></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Celestial dog</td>
<td>LG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Celestial owl</td>
<td>LG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Celestial giant fire beetle</td>
<td>NG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Celestial porpoise<strong><sup>1</sup></strong></td>
<td>NG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Celestial badger</td>
<td>CG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Celestial monkey</td>
<td>CG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish dire rat</td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish raven</td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish monstrous centipede, Medium</td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish monstrous scorpion, Small</td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish hawk</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish monstrous spider, Small</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish octopus<strong><sup>1</sup></strong></td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish snake, Small viper</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>2nd Level</strong></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Celestial giant bee</td>
<td>LG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Celestial giant bombardier beetle</td>
<td>NG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Celestial riding dog</td>
<td>NG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Celestial eagle</td>
<td>CG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Lemure (devil)</td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish squid<strong><sup>1</sup></strong></td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish wolf</td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish monstrous centipede, Large</td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish monstrous scorpion, Medium</td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish shark, Medium<strong><sup>1</sup></strong></td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish monstrous spider, Medium</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish snake, Medium viper</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>3rd Level</strong></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Celestial black bear</td>
<td>LG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Celestial bison</td>
<td>NG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Celestial dire badger</td>
<td>CG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Celestial hippogriff</td>
<td>CG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Elemental, Small (any)</td>
<td>N</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish ape</td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish dire weasel</td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Hell hound</td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish snake, constrictor</td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish boar</td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish dire bat</td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish monstrous centipede, Huge</td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish crocodile</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Dretch (demon)</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish snake, Large viper</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish wolverine</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>4th Level</strong></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Archon, lantern</td>
<td>LG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Celestial giant owl</td>
<td>LG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Celestial giant eagle</td>
<td>CG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Celestial lion</td>
<td>CG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Mephit (any)</td>
<td>N</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish dire wolf</td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish giant wasp</td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish giant praying mantis</td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish shark, Large<strong><sup>1</sup></strong></td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Yeth hound</td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish monstrous spider, Large</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish snake, Huge viper</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Howler</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>5th Level</strong></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Archon, hound</td>
<td>LG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Celestial brown bear</td>
<td>LG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Celestial giant stag beetle</td>
<td>NG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Celestial sea cat<strong><sup>1</sup></strong></td>
<td>NG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Celestial griffon</td>
<td>CG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Elemental, Medium (any)</td>
<td>N</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Achaierai</td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Devil, bearded</td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish deinonychus</td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish dire ape</td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish dire boar</td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish shark, Huge</td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish monstrous scorpion, Large</td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Shadow mastiff</td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish dire wolverine</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish giant crocodile</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish tiger</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>6th Level</strong></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Celestial polar bear</td>
<td>LG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Celestial orca whale<strong><sup>1</sup></strong></td>
<td>NG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Bralani (eladrin)</td>
<td>CG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Celestial dire lion</td>
<td>CG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Elemental, Large (any)</td>
<td>N</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Janni (genie)</td>
<td>N</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Chaos beast</td>
<td>CN</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Devil, chain</td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Xill</td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish monstrous centipede, Gargantuan</td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish rhinoceros</td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish elasmosaurus<strong><sup>1</sup></strong></td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish monstrous spider, Huge</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish snake, giant constrictor</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>7th Level</strong></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Celestial elephant</td>
<td>LG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Avoral (guardinal)</td>
<td>NG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Celestial baleen whale<strong><sup>1</sup></strong></td>
<td>NG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Djinni (genie)</td>
<td>CG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Elemental, Huge (any)</td>
<td>N</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Invisible stalker</td>
<td>N</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Devil, bone</td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish megaraptor</td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish monstrous scorpion, Huge</td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Babau (demon)</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish giant octopus<strong><sup>1</sup></strong></td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish girallon</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>8th Level</strong></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Celestial dire bear</td>
<td>LG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Celestial cachalot whale<strong><sup>1</sup></strong></td>
<td>NG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Celestial triceratops</td>
<td>NG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Lillend</td>
<td>CG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Elemental, greater (any)</td>
<td>N</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish giant squid<strong><sup>1</sup></strong></td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Hellcat</td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish monstrous centipede, Colossal</td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish dire tiger</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish monstrous spider, Gargantuan</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish tyrannosaurus</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Vrock (demon)</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>9th Level</strong></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Couatl</td>
<td>LG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Leonal (guardinal)</td>
<td>NG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Celestial roc</td>
<td>CG</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Elemental, elder (any)</td>
<td>N</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Devil, barbed</td>
<td>LE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish dire shark<strong><sup>1</sup></strong></td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fiendish monstrous scorpion, Gargantuan</td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Night hag</td>
<td>NE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Bebilith (demon)</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fiendish monstrous spider, Colossal</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Hezrou (demon)</td>
<td>CE</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>1 May be summoned only into an aquatic or watery environment.</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Summon Nature’s Ally I

Conjuration (Summoning)

**Level:** Drd 1, Rgr 1

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 1 round

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Effect:** One summoned creature

**Duration:** 1 round/level (D)

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

This spell summons a natural creature. It appears where you designate
and acts immediately, on your turn. It attacks your opponents to the
best of its ability. If you can communicate with the creature, you can
direct it not to attack, to attack particular enemies, or to perform
other actions.

A summoned monster cannot summon or otherwise conjure another creature,
nor can it use any teleportation or planar travel abilities. Creatures
cannot be summoned into an environment that cannot support them.

The spell conjures one of the creatures from the 1st-level list on the
accompanying Summon Nature’s Ally table. You choose which kind of
creature to summon, and you can change that choice each time you cast
the spell. All the creatures on the table are neutral unless otherwise
noted.

Summon Nature’s Ally II

Conjuration (Summoning)

**Level:** Drd 2, Rgr 2

**Effect:** One or more creatures, no two of which can be more than 30
ft. apart

This spell functions like *summon nature’s ally I,* except that you can
summon one 2nd-level creature or 1d3 1st-level creatures of the same
kind.

Summon Nature’s Ally III

Conjuration (Summoning) \[see text\]

**Level:** Drd 3, Rgr 3

**Effect:** One or more creatures, no two of which can be more than 30
ft. apart

This spell functions like *summon nature’s ally I,* except that you can
summon one 3rd-level creature, 1d3 2nd-level creatures of the same kind,
or 1d4+1 1st-level creatures of the same kind.

When you use a summoning spell to summon an air, chaotic, earth, evil,
fire, good, lawful, or water creature, it is a spell of that type.

Summon Nature’s Ally IV

Conjuration (Summoning) \[see text\]

**Level:** Animal 4, Drd 4, Rgr 4

**Effect:** One or more creatures, no two of which can be more than 30
ft. apart

This spell functions like *summon nature’s ally I,* except that you can
summon one 4th-level creature, 1d3 3rd-level creatures of the same kind,
or 1d4+1 lower-level creatures of the same kind.

When you use a summoning spell to summon an air, chaotic, earth, evil,
fire, good, lawful, or water creature, it is a spell of that type.

Summon Nature’s Ally V

Conjuration (Summoning) \[see text\]

**Level:** Drd 5

**Effect:** One or more creatures, no two of which can be more than 30
ft. apart

This spell functions like *summon nature’s ally I,* except that you can
summon one 5th-level creature, 1d3 4th-level creatures of the same kind,
or 1d4+1 lower-level creatures of the same kind.

When you use a summoning spell to summon an air, chaotic, earth, evil,
fire, good, lawful, or water creature, it is a spell of that type.

Summon Nature’s Ally VI

Conjuration (Summoning) \[see text\]

**Level:** Drd 6

**Effect:** One or more creatures, no two of which can be more than 30
ft. apart

This spell functions like *summon nature’s ally I,* except that you can
summon one 6th-level creature, 1d3 5th-level creatures of the same kind,
or 1d4+1 lower-level creatures of the same kind.

When you use a summoning spell to summon an air, chaotic, earth, evil,
fire, good, lawful, or water creature, it is a spell of that type.

Summon Nature’s Ally VII

Conjuration (Summoning) \[see text\]

**Level:** Drd 7

**Effect:** One or more creatures, no two of which can be more than 30
ft. apart

This spell functions like *summon nature’s ally I,* except that you can
summon one 7th-level creature, 1d3 6th-level creatures of the same kind,
or 1d4+1 lower-level creatures of the same kind.

When you use a summoning spell to summon an air, chaotic, earth, evil,
fire, good, lawful, or water creature, it is a spell of that type.

Summon Nature’s Ally VIII

Conjuration (Summoning) \[see text\]

**Level:** Animal 8, Drd 8

**Effect:** One or more creatures, no two of which can be more than 30
ft. apart

This spell functions like *summon nature’s ally I,* except that you can
summon one 8th-level creature, 1d3 7th-level creatures of the same kind,
or 1d4+1 lower-level creatures of the same kind.

When you use a summoning spell to summon an air, chaotic, earth, evil,
fire, good, lawful, or water creature, it is a spell of that type.

Summon Nature’s Ally IX

Conjuration (Summoning) \[see text\]

**Level:** Drd 9

**Effect:** One or more creatures, no two of which can be more than 30
ft. apart

This spell functions like *summon nature’s ally I,* except that you can
summon one 9th-level creature, 1d3 8th-level creatures of the same kind,
or 1d4+1 lower-level creatures of the same kind.

When you use a summoning spell to summon an air, chaotic, earth, evil,
fire, good, lawful, or water creature, it is a spell of that type.

<table>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>Summon Nature’s Ally</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>1st Level</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Dire rat</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Eagle (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Monkey (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Octopus<strong><sup>1</sup></strong> (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Owl (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Porpoise<strong><sup>1</sup></strong> (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Snake, Small viper (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Wolf (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>2nd Level</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Bear, black (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Crocodile (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Dire badger</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Dire bat</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Elemental, Small (any)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Hippogriff</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Shark, Medium<strong><sup>1</sup></strong> (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Snake, Medium viper (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Squid<strong><sup>1</sup></strong> (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Wolverine (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>3rd Level</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Ape (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Dire weasel</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Dire wolf</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Eagle, giant [NG]</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Lion</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Owl, giant [NG]</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Satyr [CN; without pipes]</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Shark, Large<strong><sup>1</sup></strong> (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Snake, constrictor (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Snake, Large viper (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Thoqqua</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>4th Level</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Arrowhawk, juvenile</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Bear, brown (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Crocodile, giant (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Deinonychus (dinosaur)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Dire ape</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Dire boar</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Dire wolverine</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Elemental, Medium (any)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Salamander, flamebrother [NE]</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Sea cat<strong><sup>1</sup></strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Shark, Huge<strong><sup>1</sup></strong> (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Snake, Huge viper (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Tiger (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Tojanida, juvenile<strong><sup>1</sup></strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Unicorn [CG]</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Xorn, minor</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>5th Level</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Arrowhawk, adult</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Bear, polar (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Dire lion</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Elasmosaurus<strong><sup>1</sup></strong> (dinosaur)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Elemental, Large (any)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Griffon</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Janni (genie)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Rhinoceros (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Satyr [CN; with pipes]</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Snake, giant constrictor (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Nixie (sprite)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Tojanida, adult<strong><sup>1</sup></strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Whale, orca<strong><sup>1</sup></strong> (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>6th Level</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Dire bear</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Elemental, Huge (any)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Elephant (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Girallon</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Megaraptor (dinosaur)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Octopus, giant<strong><sup>1</sup></strong> (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Pixie* (sprite) [NG; no special arrows]</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Salamander, average [NE]</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Whale, baleen<strong><sup>1</sup></strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Xorn, average</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>*Can’t cast <em>irresistible dance</em></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>7th Level</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Arrowhawk, elder</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Dire tiger</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Elemental, greater (any)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Djinni (genie) [NG]</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Invisible stalker</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Pixie* (sprite) [NG; with sleep arrows]</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Squid, giant<strong><sup>1</sup></strong> (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Triceratops (dinosaur)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Tyrannosaurus (dinosaur)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Whale, cachalot<strong><sup>1</sup></strong> (animal)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Xorn, elder</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>*Can’t cast <em>irresistible dance</em></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>8th Level</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Dire shark<strong><sup>1</sup></strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Roc</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Salamander, noble [NE]</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Tojanida, elder</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>9th Level</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Elemental, elder</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Grig [NG; with fiddle] (sprite)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Pixie* (sprite) [NG; with sleep and memory loss arrows]</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Unicorn, celestial charger</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>*Can cast <em>irresistible dance</em></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>1 May be summoned only into an aquatic or watery environment.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Summon Swarm

Conjuration (Summoning)

**Level:** Brd 2, Drd 2, Sor/Wiz 2

**Components:** V, S, M/DF

**Casting Time:** 1 round

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Effect:** One swarm of bats, rats, or spiders

**Duration:** Concentration + 2 rounds

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

You summon a swarm of bats, rats, or spiders (your choice), which
attacks all other creatures within its area. (You may summon the swarm
so that it shares the area of other creatures.) If no living creatures
are within its area, the swarm attacks or pursues the nearest creature
as best it can. The caster has no control over its target or direction
of travel.

*Arcane Material Component:* A square of red cloth.

Sunbeam

Evocation \[Light\]

**Level:** Drd 7, Sun 7

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** 60 ft.

**Area:** Line from your hand

**Duration:** 1 round/level or until all beams are exhausted

**Saving Throw:** Reflex negates and Reflex half; see text

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

For the duration of this spell, you can use a standard action to evoke a
dazzling beam of intense light each round. You can call forth one beam
per three caster levels (maximum six beams at 18th level). The spell
ends when its duration runs out or your allotment of beams is exhausted.

Each creature in the beam is blinded and takes 4d6 points of damage. Any
creatures to which sunlight is harmful or unnatural take double damage.
A successful Reflex save negates the blindness and reduces the damage by
half.

An undead creature caught within the beam takes 1d6 points of damage per
caster level (maximum 20d6), or half damage if a Reflex save is
successful. In addition, the beam results in the destruction of any
undead creature specifically harmed by bright light if it fails its
save.

The ultraviolet light generated by the spell deals damage to fungi,
mold, oozes, and slimes just as if they were undead creatures.

Sunburst

Evocation \[Light\]

**Level:** Drd 8, Sor/Wiz 8, Sun 8

**Components:** V, S, M/DF

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Range:** Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level)

**Area:** 80-ft.-radius burst

**Duration:** Instantaneous

**Saving Throw:** Reflex partial; see text

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

*Sunburst* causes a globe of searing radiance to explode silently from a
point you select. All creatures in the globe are blinded and take 6d6
points of damage. A creature to which sunlight is harmful or unnatural
takes double damage. A successful Reflex save negates the blindness and
reduces the damage by half.

An undead creature caught within the globe takes 1d6 points of damage
per caster level (maximum 25d6), or half damage if a Reflex save is
successful. In addition, the burst results in the destruction of any
undead creature specifically harmed by bright light if it fail its save.

The ultraviolet light generated by the spell deals damage to fungi,
mold, oozes, and slimes just as if they were undead creatures.

*Sunburst* dispels any darkness spells of lower than 9th level within
its area.

*Arcane Material Component:* A piece of sunstone and a naked flame.

Symbol of Death

Necromancy \[Death\]

**Level:** Clr 8, Sor/Wiz 8

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 10 minutes

**Range:** 0 ft.; see text

**Effect:** One symbol

**Duration:** See text

**Saving Throw:** Fortitude negates

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

This spell allows you to scribe a potent rune of power upon a surface.
When triggered, a *symbol of death* slays one or more creatures within
60 feet of the symbol (treat as a burst) whose combined total current
hit points do not exceed 150. The *symbol of death* affects the closest
creatures first, skipping creatures with too many hit points to affect.
Once triggered, the *symbol* becomes active and glows, lasting for 10
minutes per caster level or until it has affected 150 hit points’ worth
of creatures, whichever comes first. Any creature that enters the area
while the *symbol of death* is active is subject to its effect, whether
or not that creature was in the area when it was triggered. A creature
need save against the *symbol* only once as long as it remains within
the area, though if it leaves the area and returns while the *symbol* is
still active, it must save again.

Until it is triggered, the *symbol of death* is inactive (though visible
and legible at a distance of 60 feet). To be effective, a *symbol of
death* must always be placed in plain sight and in a prominent location.
Covering or hiding the rune renders the *symbol of death* ineffective,
unless a creature removes the covering, in which case the *symbol of
death* works normally.

As a default, a *symbol of death* is triggered whenever a creature does
one or more of the following, as you select: looks at the rune; reads
the rune; touches the rune; passes over the rune; or passes through a
portal bearing the rune. Regardless of the trigger method or methods
chosen, a creature more than 60 feet from a symbol of death can’t
trigger it (even if it meets one or more of the triggering conditions,
such as reading the rune). Once the spell is cast, a *symbol of death*’s
triggering conditions cannot be changed.

In this case, “reading” the rune means any attempt to study it, identify
it, or fathom its meaning. Throwing a cover over a *symbol of death* to
render it inoperative triggers it if the symbol reacts to touch. You
can’t use a *symbol of death* offensively; for instance, a
touch-triggered symbol of death remains untriggered if an item bearing
the *symbol of death* is used to touch a creature. Likewise, a *symbol
of death* cannot be placed on a weapon and set to activate when the
weapon strikes a foe.

You can also set special triggering limitations of your own. These can
be as simple or elaborate as you desire. Special conditions for
triggering a *symbol of death* can be based on a creature’s name,
identity, or alignment, but otherwise must be based on observable
actions or qualities. Intangibles such as level, class, Hit Dice, and
hit points don’t qualify.

When scribing a *symbol of death*, you can specify a password or phrase
that prevents a creature using it from triggering the effect*.* Anyone
using the password remains immune to that particular rune’s effects so
long as the creature remains within 60 feet of the rune. If the creature
leaves the radius and returns later, it must use the password again.

You also can attune any number of creatures to the *symbol of death,*
but doing this can extend the casting time. Attuning one or two
creatures takes negligible time, and attuning a small group (as many as
ten creatures) extends the casting time to 1 hour. Attuning a large
group (as many as twenty-five creatures) takes 24 hours. Attuning larger
groups takes proportionately longer. Any creature attuned to a *symbol
of death* cannot trigger it and is immune to its effects, even if within
its radius when triggered. You are automatically considered attuned to
your own *symbols of death*, and thus always ignore the effects and
cannot inadvertently trigger them.

*Read magic* allows you to identify a *symbol of death* with a DC 19
Spellcraft check. Of course, if the *symbol of death* is set to be
triggered by reading it, this will trigger the symbol.

A *symbol of death* can be removed by a successful *dispel magic*
targeted solely on the rune. An *erase* spell has no effect on a *symbol
of death.* Destruction of the surface where a *symbol of death* is
inscribed destroys the *symbol* but also triggers it.

*Symbol of death* can be made permanent with a *permanency* spell. A
permanent *symbol of death* that is disabled or that has affected its
maximum number of hit points becomes inactive for 10 minutes, then can
be triggered again as normal.

*Note:* Magic traps such as *symbol of death* are hard to detect and
disable. A rogue (only) can use the Search skill to find a *symbol of
death* and Disable Device to thwart it. The DC in each case is 25 +
spell level, or 33 for *symbol of death*.

*Material Component:* Mercury and phosphorus, plus powdered diamond and
opal with a total value of at least 5,000 gp each.

Symbol of Fear

Necromancy \[Fear, Mind-Affecting\]

**Level:** Clr 6, Sor/Wiz 6

**Saving Throw:** Will negates

This spell functions like *symbol of death*, except that all creatures
within 60 feet of the *symbol of fear* instead become panicked for 1
round per caster level.

*Note:* Magic traps such as *symbol of fear* are hard to detect and
disable. A rogue (only) can use the Search skill to find a *symbol of
fear* and Disable Device to thwart it. The DC in each case is 25 + spell
level, or 31 for *symbol of fear*.

*Material Component:* Mercury and phosphorus, plus powdered diamond and
opal with a total value of at least 1,000 gp.

Symbol of Insanity

Enchantment (Compulsion) \[Mind-Affecting\]

**Level:** Clr 8, Sor/Wiz 8

**Saving Throw:** Will negates

This spell functions like *symbol of death*, except that all creatures
within the radius of the *symbol of insanity* instead become permanently
insane (as the *insanity* spell).

Unlike *symbol of death*, symbol of insanity has no hit point limit;
once triggered, a *symbol of insanity* simply remains active for 10
minutes per caster level.

*Note:* Magic traps such as *symbol of insanity* are hard to detect and
disable. A rogue (only) can use the Search skill to find a *symbol of
insanity* and Disable Device to thwart it. The DC in each case is 25 +
spell level, or 33 for *symbol of insanity*.

*Material Component:* Mercury and phosphorus, plus powdered diamond and
opal with a total value of at least 5,000 gp.

Symbol of Pain

Necromancy \[Evil\]

**Level:** Clr 5, Sor/Wiz 5

This spell functions like *symbol of death*, except that each creature
within the radius of a *symbol of pain* instead suffers wracking pains
that impose a –4 penalty on attack rolls, skill checks, and ability
checks. These effects last for 1 hour after the creature moves farther
than 60 feet from the symbol.

Unlike *symbol of death*, *symbol of pain* has no hit point limit; once
triggered, a *symbol of pain* simply remains active for 10 minutes per
caster level.

*Note:* Magic traps such as *symbol of pain* are hard to detect and
disable. A rogue (only) can use the Search skill to find a *symbol of
pain* and Disable Device to thwart it. The DC in each case is 25 + spell
level, or 30 for *symbol of pain*.

*Material Component:* Mercury and phosphorus, plus powdered diamond and
opal with a total value of at least 1,000 gp.

Symbol of Persuasion

Enchantment (Charm) \[Mind-Affecting\]

**Level:** Clr 6, Sor/Wiz 6

**Saving Throw:** Will negates

This spell functions like *symbol of death*, except that all creatures
within the radius of a *symbol of persuasion* instead become *charmed*
by the caster (as the *charm monster* spell) for 1 hour per caster
level.

Unlike *symbol of death*, *symbol of persuasion* has no hit point limit;
once triggered, a *symbol of persuasion* simply remains active for 10
minutes per caster level.

*Note:* Magic traps such as *symbol of persuasion* are hard to detect
and disable. A rogue (only) can use the Search skill to find a *symbol
of persuasion* and Disable Device to thwart it. The DC in each case is
25 + spell level, or 31 for *symbol of persuasion*.

*Material Component:* Mercury and phosphorus, plus powdered diamond and
opal with a total value of at least 5,000 gp.

Symbol of Sleep

Enchantment (Compulsion) \[Mind-Affecting\]

**Level:** Clr 5, Sor/Wiz 5

**Saving Throw:** Will negates

This spell functions like *symbol of death*, except that all creatures
of 10 HD or less within 60 feet of the *symbol of sleep* instead fall
into a catatonic slumber for 3d6x10 minutes. Unlike with the *sleep*
spell, sleeping creatures cannot be awakened by nonmagical means before
this time expires.

Unlike *symbol of death*, *symbol of sleep* has no hit point limit; once
triggered, a *symbol of sleep* simply remains active for 10 minutes per
caster level.

*Note:* Magic traps such as *symbol of sleep* are hard to detect and
disable. A rogue (only) can use the Search skill to find a *symbol of
sleep* and Disable Device to thwart it. The DC in each case is 25 +
spell level, or 30 for *symbol of sleep*.

*Material Component:* Mercury and phosphorus, plus powdered diamond and
opal with a total value of at least 1,000 gp.

Symbol of Stunning

Enchantment (Compulsion) \[Mind-Affecting\]

**Level:** Clr 7, Sor/Wiz 7

**Saving Throw:** Will negates

This spell functions like *symbol of death*, except that all creatures
within 60 feet of a *symbol of stunning* instead become stunned for 1d6
rounds.

*Note:* Magic traps such as *symbol of stunning* are hard to detect and
disable. A rogue (only) can use the Search skill to find a *symbol of
stunning* and Disable Device to thwart it. The DC in each case is 25 +
spell level, or 32 for *symbol of stunning*.

*Material Component:* Mercury and phosphorus, plus powdered diamond and
opal with a total value of at least 5,000 gp.

Symbol of Weakness

Necromancy

**Level:** Clr 7, Sor/Wiz 7

This spell functions like *symbol of death*, except that every creature
within 60 feet of a *symbol of weakness* instead suffers crippling
weakness that deals 3d6 points of Strength damage.

Unlike *symbol of death*, *symbol of weakness* has no hit point limit;
once triggered, a *symbol of weakness* simply remains active for 10
minutes per caster level.

*Note:* Magic traps such as *symbol of weakness* are hard to detect and
disable. A rogue (only) can use the Search skill to find a *symbol of
weakness* and Disable Device to thwart it. The DC in each case is 25 +
spell level, or 32 for *symbol of weakness*.

*Material Component:* Mercury and phosphorus, plus powdered diamond and
opal with a total value of at least 5,000 gp.

Sympathetic Vibration

Evocation \[Sonic\]

**Level:** Brd 6

**Components:** V, S, F

**Casting Time:** 10 minutes

**Range:** Touch

**Target:** One freestanding structure

**Duration:** Up to 1 round/level

**Saving Throw:** None; see text

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

By attuning yourself to a freestanding structure such you can create a
damaging vibration within it. Once it begins, the vibration deals 2d10
points of damage per round to the target structure. (Hardness has no
effect on the spell’s damage.) You can choose at the time of casting to
limit the duration of the spell; otherwise it lasts for 1 round/ level.
If the spell is cast upon a target that is not freestanding the
surrounding stone dissipates the effect and no damage occurs.

*Sympathetic vibration* cannot affect creatures (including constructs).
Since a structure is an unattended object, it gets no saving throw to
resist the effect.

*Focus:* A tuning fork.

Sympathy

Enchantment (Compulsion) \[Mind-Affecting\]

**Level:** Drd 9, Sor/Wiz 8

**Components:** V, S, M

**Casting Time:** 1 hour

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target:** One location (up to a 10-ft. cube/level) or one object

**Duration:** 2 hours/level (D)

**Saving Throw:** Will negates; see text

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

You cause an object or location to emanate magical vibrations that
attract either a specific kind of intelligent creature or creatures of a
particular alignment, as defined by you. The particular kind of creature
to be affected must be named specifically. A creature subtype is not
specific enough. Likewise, the specific alignment must be named.

Creatures of the specified kind or alignment feel elated and pleased to
be in the area or desire to touch or to possess the object. The
compulsion to stay in the area or touch the object is overpowering. If
the save is successful, the creature is released from the enchantment,
but a subsequent save must be made 1d6x10 minutes later. If this save
fails, the affected creature attempts to return to the area or object.

*Sympathy* counters and dispels *antipathy*.

*Material Component:* 1,500 gp worth of crushed pearls and a drop of
honey.
